Right to Know

Hazardous Substance Fact Sheet
Common Name:

1-BROMOPROPANE

Synonyms: Propyl Bromide

CAS Number:

106-94-5

Chemical Name: Propane, 1-Bromo-

RTK Substance Number:

4198

Date: October 2009

DOT Number:

UN 2344

Revision: March 2016

Description and Use
1-Bromopropane is a clear, colorless liquid with a sweet odor.
It is used in dry cleaning, and as a solvent, adhesive, and an
aerosol propellant.

Reasons for Citation
 1-Bromopropane is on the Right to Know Hazardous

Substance List because it is cited by the EPA, NTP, ACGIH
and DOT.
 This chemical is on the Special Health Hazard Substance
List.

EMERGENCY RESPONDERS >>>> SEE BACK PAGE

Hazard Summary
Hazard Rating
NJDHSS
HEALTH
2
FLAMMABILITY
3
REACTIVITY
1
FLAMMABLE
POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE
CONTAINERS MAY EXPLODE IN FIRE

NFPA
-

Hazard Rating Key: 0=minimal; 1=slight; 2=moderate; 3=serious;
4=severe
 1-Bromopropane can affect you when inhaled and may be

absorbed through the skin.
 1-Bromopropane should be handled as a CARCINOGEN--

WITH EXTREME CAUTION.
 1-Bromopropane may cause reproductive damage.

SEE GLOSSARY ON PAGE 5.

FIRST AID
Eye Contact
 Immediately flush with large amounts of water for at least 15
minutes, lifting upper and lower lids. Remove contact
lenses, if worn, while rinsing.
Skin Contact
 Remove contaminated clothing and wash contaminated skin
with soap and water.
Inhalation
 Remove the person from exposure.
 Begin rescue breathing (using universal precautions) if
breathing has stopped and CPR if heart action has stopped.
 Transfer promptly to a medical facility.

EMERGENCY NUMBERS
Poison Control: 1-800-222-1222
CHEMTREC: 1-800-424-9300
NJDEP Hotline: 1-877-927-6337
National Response Center: 1-800-424-8802

HANDLE WITH EXTREME CAUTION.
 Contact can irritate the skin and eyes.
 Inhaling 1-Bromopropane can irritate the nose, throat and

lungs.
 Exposure can cause headache, dizziness, lightheadedness,

trouble concentrating, and weakness.
 1-Bromopropane may damage the nervous system causing

numbness, “pins and needles,” and/or weakness in the
hands and feet.
 1-Bromopropane may affect the liver.
 1-Bromopropane is a FLAMMABLE LIQUID and a
DANGEROUS FIRE HAZARD.

Workplace Exposure Limits
ACGIH: The threshold limit value (TLV) is 10 ppm averaged
over an 8-hour workshift.
 The above exposure limit is for air levels only. When skin

contact also occurs, you may be overexposed, even though
air levels are less than the limit listed above.
 1-Bromopropane is a PROBABLE CARCINOGEN in

humans. There may be no safe level of exposure to a
carcinogen, so all contact should be reduced to the lowest
possible level.

Page 2 of 6

1-BROMOPROPANE
Determining Your Exposure
 Read the product manufacturer’s Material Safety Data

Sheet (MSDS) and the label to determine product
ingredients and important safety and health information
about the product mixture.
 For each individual hazardous ingredient, read the New

Jersey Department of Health Hazardous Substance Fact
Sheet, available on the RTK website
(http://nj.gov/health/workplacehealthandsafety/right-toknow) or in your facility’s RTK Central File or Hazard
Communication Standard file.
 You have a right to this information under the New Jersey

Worker and Community Right to Know Act, and the Public
Employees Occupational Safety and Health (PEOSH) Act
if you are a public worker in New Jersey, and under the
federal Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) if you
are a private worker.
 The New Jersey Right to Know Act requires most

employers to label chemicals in the workplace and
requires public employers to provide their employees with
information concerning chemical hazards and controls.
The federal OSHA Hazard Communication Standard (29
CFR 1910.1200) and the PEOSH Hazard Communication
Standard (N.J.A.C. 12:100-7) require employers to provide
similar information and training to their employees.
This Fact Sheet is a summary of available information
regarding the health hazards that may result from exposure.
Duration of exposure, concentration of the substance and other
factors will affect your susceptibility to any of the potential
effects described below.

Health Hazard Information
Acute Health Effects
The following acute (short-term) health effects may occur
immediately or shortly after exposure to 1-Bromopropane:
 Contact can irritate the skin and eyes.
 Inhaling 1-Bromopropane can irritate the nose, throat and

lungs causing coughing, wheezing and/or shortness of
breath.
 Exposure can cause headache, dizziness, lightheadedness,
trouble concentrating, and weakness.
Chronic Health Effects
The following chronic (long-term) health effects can occur at
some time after exposure to 1-Bromopropane and can last for
months or years:
Cancer Hazard
 1-Bromopropane may be a CARCINOGEN in humans
since it has been shown to cause intestinal and lung cancers
in animals.

Reproductive Hazard
 1-Bromopropane may decrease fertility in males and
females.
 There is limited evidence that 1-Bromopropane may
damage the male (testes) and female (ovaries) reproductive
systems in animals.
Other Effects
 Prolonged or repeated exposure can cause drying and
cracking of the skin with redness.
 1-Bromopropane may damage the nervous system causing
numbness, “pins and needles,” and/or weakness in the
hands and feet.
 1-Bromopropane may affect the liver.

Medical
Medical Testing
Before beginning employment and at regular times thereafter,
(at least annually), the following are recommended:
 Liver function tests

If symptoms develop or overexposure is suspected, the
following is recommended:
 Exam of the nervous system

Any evaluation should include a careful history of past and
present symptoms with an exam. Medical tests that look for
damage already done are not a substitute for controlling
exposure.
Request copies of your medical testing. You have a legal right
to this information under the OSHA Access to Employee
Exposure and Medical Records Standard (29 CFR 1910.1020).
Mixed Exposures
 More than light alcohol consumption can cause liver
damage. Drinking alcohol may increase the liver damage
caused by 1-Bromopropane.

Page 3 of 6

1-BROMOPROPANE
Workplace Controls and Practices
Very toxic chemicals, or those that are reproductive hazards or
sensitizers, require expert advice on control measures if a less
toxic chemical cannot be substituted. Control measures
include: (1) enclosing chemical processes for severely
irritating and corrosive chemicals, (2) using local exhaust
ventilation for chemicals that may be harmful with a single
exposure, and (3) using general ventilation to control
exposures to skin and eye irritants. For further information on
workplace controls, consult the NIOSH document on Control
Banding at www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/ctrlbanding/.
The following work practices are also recommended:
 Label process containers.
 Provide employees with hazard information and training.
 Monitor airborne chemical concentrations.
 Use engineering controls if concentrations exceed

recommended exposure levels.
 Provide eye wash fountains and emergency showers.
 Wash or shower if skin comes in contact with a hazardous

material.
 Always wash at the end of the workshift.
 Change into clean clothing if clothing becomes

contaminated.
 Do not take contaminated clothing home.
 Get special training to wash contaminated clothing.
 Do not eat, smoke, or drink in areas where chemicals are

being handled, processed or stored.
 Wash hands carefully before eating, smoking, drinking,

applying cosmetics or using the toilet.
In addition, the following may be useful or required:
 Before entering a confined space where 1-Bromopropane

may be present, check to make sure that an explosive
concentration does not exist.

Eye Protection
 Wear indirect-vent, impact and splash resistant goggles
when working with liquids.
 Wear a face shield along with goggles when working with
corrosive, highly irritating or toxic substances.
Respiratory Protection
Improper use of respirators is dangerous. Respirators
should only be used if the employer has implemented a written
program that takes into account workplace conditions,
requirements for worker training, respirator fit testing, and
medical exams, as described in the OSHA Respiratory
Protection Standard (29 CFR 1910.134).
 Where the potential exists for exposure over 10 ppm, use a

NIOSH approved full facepiece respirator with an organic
vapor cartridge. Increased protection is obtained from full
facepiece powered-air purifying respirators.
 Leave the area immediately if (1) while wearing a filter or
cartridge respirator you can smell, taste, or otherwise detect
1-Bromopropane, (2) while wearing particulate filters
abnormal resistance to breathing is experienced, or (3) eye
irritation occurs while wearing a full facepiece respirator.
Check to make sure the respirator-to-face seal is still good.
If it is, replace the filter or cartridge. If the seal is no longer
good, you may need a new respirator.
 Consider all potential sources of exposure in your workplace.
You may need a combination of filters, prefilters or cartridges
to protect against different forms of a chemical (such as
vapor and mist) or against a mixture of chemicals.
 Where the potential exists for exposure over 100 ppm, use a
NIOSH approved supplied-air respirator with a full facepiece
operated in a pressure-demand or other positive-pressure
mode. For increased protection use in combination with an
auxiliary self-contained breathing apparatus operated in a
pressure-demand or other positive-pressure mode.

Fire Hazards
Personal Protective Equipment
The OSHA Personal Protective Equipment Standard (29 CFR
1910.132) requires employers to determine the appropriate
personal protective equipment for each hazard and to train
employees on how and when to use protective equipment.
The following recommendations are only guidelines and may
not apply to every situation.
Gloves and Clothing
 Avoid skin contact with 1-Bromopropane. Wear personal
protective equipment made from material that can not be
permeated or degraded by this substance. Safety
equipment suppliers and manufacturers can provide
recommendations on the most protective glove and clothing
material for your operation.
 Safety equipment manufacturers recommend Silver
Shield®/4H® and Viton for gloves and DuPont Tychem® LV,
Responder® and TK; Kappler® Zytron® 500; and SaintGobain ONESuit® TEC, or the equivalent, as protective
materials for Aliphatic Halogen compounds.
 All protective clothing (suits, gloves, footwear, headgear)
should be clean, available each day, and put on before work.

If employees are expected to fight fires, they must be trained
and equipped as stated in the OSHA Fire Brigades Standard
(29 CFR 1910.156).
 1-Bromopropane is a FLAMMABLE LIQUID.
 Use dry chemical, CO2, water spray or alcohol-resistant

foam as extinguishing agents.
 POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE, including

Hydrogen Bromide.
 CONTAINERS MAY EXPLODE IN FIRE.
 Use water spray to keep fire-exposed containers cool.
 Vapors may travel to a source of ignition and flash back.
 Vapor is heavier than air and may travel a distance to cause

a fire or explosion far from the source.
 Flow or agitation may generate electrostatic charges.

Page 4 of 6

1-BROMOPROPANE
Spills and Emergencies
If employees are required to clean-up spills, they must be
properly trained and equipped. The OSHA Hazardous Waste
Operations and Emergency Response Standard (29 CFR
1910.120) may apply.
If 1-Bromopropane is spilled or leaked, take the following
steps:

Occupational Health Information
Resources
The New Jersey Department of Health and Occupational
Health Service, offers multiple services in occupational health.
These services include providing informational resources,
educational materials, public presentations, and industrial
hygiene and medical investigations and evaluations.

 Evacuate personnel and secure and control entrance to the

area.
 Eliminate all ignition sources.
 Absorb liquids in vermiculite, dry sand, earth, or a similar

material and deposit in sealed containers.
 Ventilate and wash area after clean-up is complete.
 Keep 1-Bromopropane out of confined spaces, such as

sewers, because of the possibility of an explosion.
 DO NOT wash into sewer.
 It may be necessary to contain and dispose of

1-Bromopropane as a HAZARDOUS WASTE. Contact
your state Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or
your regional office of the federal Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) for specific recommendations.

Handling and Storage
Prior to working with 1-Bromopropane you should be trained
on its proper handling and storage.
 1-Bromopropane is not compatible with OXIDIZING

AGENTS (such as PERCHLORATES, PEROXIDES,
PERMANGANATES, CHLORATES, NITRATES,
CHLORINE, BROMINE and FLUORINE) and STRONG
BASES (such as SODIUM HYDROXIDE and POTASSIUM
HYDROXIDE).
 Store in tightly closed containers in a cool, well-ventilated
area.
 Sources of ignition, such as smoking and open flames, are
prohibited where 1-Bromopropane is used, handled, or
stored.
 Metal containers involving the transfer of 1-Bromopropane
should be grounded and bonded.
 Use only non-sparking tools and equipment, especially when
opening and closing containers of 1-Bromopropane.
 1-Bromopropane may accumulate static electricity when
being filled into properly grounded containers.
 Grounding and bonding may not be sufficient to remove
static electricity.

For more information, please contact:
New Jersey Department of Health
Right to Know
PO Box 368
Trenton, NJ 08625-0368
Phone: 609-984-2202
Fax: 609-984-7407
E-mail: rtk@doh.nj.gov
Web address:
http://nj.gov/health/workplacehealthandsafety/right-toknow
The Right to Know Hazardous Substance Fact Sheets
are not intended to be copied and sold
for commercial purposes.

1-BROMOPROPANE

Page 5 of 6

GLOSSARY
ACGIH is the American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists. They publish guidelines called Threshold Limit
Values (TLVs) for exposure to workplace chemicals.

LEL or Lower Explosive Limit, is the lowest concentration of
a combustible substance (gas or vapor) in the air capable of
continuing an explosion.

Acute Exposure Guideline Levels (AEGLs) are established
by the EPA. They describe the risk to humans resulting from
once-in-a lifetime, or rare, exposure to airborne chemicals.

mg/m3 means milligrams of a chemical in a cubic meter of air.
It is a measure of concentration (weight/volume).

Boiling point is the temperature at which a substance can
change its physical state from a liquid to a gas.

A mutagen is a substance that causes mutations. A mutation
is a change in the genetic material in a body cell. Mutations
can lead to birth defects, miscarriages, or cancer.

A carcinogen is a substance that causes cancer.
The CAS number is unique, identifying number, assigned by
the Chemical Abstracts Service, to a specific chemical.
CFR is the Code of Federal Regulations, which are the
regulations of the United States government.
A combustible substance is a solid, liquid or gas that will burn.
A corrosive substance is a gas, liquid or solid that causes
destruction of human skin or severe corrosion of containers.
DEP is the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.

NFPA is the National Fire Protection Association. It classifies
substances according to their fire and explosion hazard.
NIOSH is the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health. It tests equipment, evaluates and approves
respirators, conducts studies of workplace hazards, and
proposes standards to OSHA.
NTP is the National Toxicology Program which tests chemicals
and reviews evidence for cancer.
OSHA is the federal Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, which adopts and enforces health and safety
standards.

DOT is the Department of Transportation, the federal agency
that regulates the transportation of chemicals.

PEOSHA is the New Jersey Public Employees Occupational
Safety and Health Act, which adopts and enforces health and
safety standards in public workplaces.

EPA is the Environmental Protection Agency, the federal
agency responsible for regulating environmental hazards.

Permeated is the movement of chemicals through protective
materials.

ERG is the Emergency Response Guidebook. It is a guide for
emergency responders for transportation emergencies
involving hazardous substances.

PIH is a DOT designation for chemicals which are Poison
Inhalation Hazards.

Emergency Response Planning Guideline (ERPG) values
are intended to provide estimates of concentration ranges
where one reasonably might anticipate observing adverse
effects.
A fetus is an unborn human or animal.
A flammable substance is a solid, liquid, vapor or gas that will
ignite easily and burn rapidly.
The flash point is the temperature at which a liquid or solid
gives off vapor that can form a flammable mixture with air.

ppm means parts of a substance per million parts of air. It is a
measure of concentration by volume in air.
A reactive substance is a solid, liquid or gas that releases
energy under certain conditions.
STEL is a Short Term Exposure Limit which is usually a 15minute exposure that should not be exceeded at any time
during a work day.
A teratogen is a substance that causes birth defects by
damaging the fetus.

IARC is the International Agency for Research on Cancer, a
scientific group.

UEL or Upper Explosive Limit is the highest concentration in
air above which there is too much fuel (gas or vapor) to begin a
reaction or explosion.

Ionization Potential is the amount of energy needed to
remove an electron from an atom or molecule. It is measured
in electron volts.

Vapor Density is the ratio of the weight of a given volume of
one gas to the weight of another (usually Hydrogen), at the
same temperature and pressure.

IRIS is the Integrated Risk Information System database
maintained by federal EPA. The database contains
information on human health effects that may result from
exposure to various chemicals in the environment.

The vapor pressure is a measure of how readily a liquid or a
solid mixes with air at its surface. A higher vapor pressure
indicates a higher concentration of the substance in air and
therefore increases the likelihood of breathing it in.

Right to Know Hazardous Substance Fact Sheet
Common Name: 1-BROMOPROPANE
Synonyms: Propyl Bromide
CAS No: 106-94-5
Molecular Formula: C3H7Br
RTK Substance No: 4198
Description: Clear, colorless, liquid with a sweet odor

HAZARD DATA
Hazard Rating

Firefighting

Reactivity

2 - Health

1-Bromopropane is a FLAMMABLE LIQUID.
Use dry chemical, CO2, water spray or alcoholresistant foam as extinguishing agents.
POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE,
including Hydrogen Bromide.
CONTAINERS MAY EXPLODE IN FIRE.
Use water spray to keep fire-exposed containers cool.
Vapors may travel to a source of ignition and flash back.
Vapor is heavier than air and may travel a distance
to cause a fire or explosion far from the source.
Flow or agitation may generate electrostatic charges.

1-Bromopropane is not compatible with
OXIDIZING AGENTS (such as PERCHLORATES,
PEROXIDES, PERMANGANATES, CHLORATES,
NITRATES, CHLORINE, BROMINE and
FLUORINE) and STRONG BASES (such as
SODIUM HYDROXIDE and POTASSIUM
HYDROXIDE).
1-Bromopropane may accumulate static electricity
when being filled into properly grounded
containers.
Grounding and bonding may not be sufficient to
remove static electricity.

3 - Fire
1 - Reactivity
DOT#: UN 2344
ERG Guide #: 129
Hazard Class: 3
(Flammable)

SPILL/LEAKS
Isolation Distance:
Small Spill: 60 meters (200 feet)
Large Spill: 270 meters (900 feet)
Fire: 80 meters (1/2 mile)
Absorb liquids in vermiculite, dry sand, earth, or a
similar material and deposit in sealed containers.
Keep 1-Bromopropane out of confined spaces, such
as sewers, because of the possibility of an explosion.
DO NOT wash into sewer.
1-Bromopropane may bioaccumulate.

PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
Odor Threshold:
Flash Point:
LEL:
UEL:
Auto Ignition Temp:
Vapor Density:
Vapor Pressure:
Specific Gravity:
Water Solubility:
Boiling Point:
Melting Point:
Molecular Weight:

EXPOSURE LIMITS
ACGIH: 10 ppm, 8-hr TWA
The Protective Action Criteria values are:
PAC-1 = 0.3 ppm
PAC-2 = 120 ppm
PAC-3 = 700 ppm

HEALTH EFFECTS
Eyes:
Skin:
Inhalation:

Irritation
Irritation, drying and cracking with
redness
Nose, throat and lung irritation with
coughing, wheezing and shortness of
breath
Headache, dizziness and
lightheadedness

Sweet odor
72oF (21oC)
4.6%
7.8%
914oF (490oC)
4.3 (air = 1)
143 mm Hg at 77oF (25oC)
1.35 (water = 1)
Slightly soluble
160oF (71oC)
-166oF (-110oC)
123

PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT
Gloves:
Coveralls:

Respirator:

Silver Shield®/4H® and Viton
DuPont Tychem® LV, Responder® and TK; Kappler®
Zytron® 500; and Saint-Gobain ONESuit® TEC for
Aliphatic Halogen compounds
>10 ppm - Supplied air
>30 ppm - SCBA

FIRST AID AND DECONTAMINATION
Remove the person from exposure.
Flush eyes with large amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. Remove
contact lenses if worn.
Remove contaminated clothing and wash contaminated skin with soap
and water.
Begin artificial respiration if breathing has stopped and CPR if necessary.
Transfer to a medical facility.

March 2016

