Common Name: 1-CHLORO-1-NITROPROPANE
CAS Number: 600-25-9
DOT Number: None
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

RTK Substance number: 0395
Date: March 1993
Revision: December 1999
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

HAZARD SUMMARY
* 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane can affect you when breathed
in.
* Contact can irritate and burn the skin and eyes.
* Breathing 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane can irritate the nose
and throat.
* Breathing 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane can irritate the lungs
causing coughing and/or shortness of breath. Higher
exposures can cause a build-up of fluid in the lungs
(pulmonary edema), a medical emergency, with severe
shortness of breath.
* 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane may cause liver, kidney and
heart damage.
* 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane is a REACTIVE CHEMICAL
and an EXPLOSION HAZARD.

* If you think you are experiencing any work-related health
problems, see a doctor trained to recognize occupational
diseases. Take this Fact Sheet with you.

IDENTIFICATION

WAYS OF REDUCING EXPOSURE

1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane is a colorless liquid with an
unpleasant and irritating odor. It is used as a fungicide.

REASON FOR CITATION
* 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane is on the Hazardous Substance
List because it is regulated by OSHA and cited by
ACGIH, NIOSH and NFPA.
* This chemical is on the Special Health Hazard Substance
List because it is REACTIVE.
* Definitions are provided on page 5.

HOW TO DETERMINE IF YOU ARE BEING
EXPOSED
The New Jersey Right to Know Act requires most employers
to label chemicals in the workplace and requires public
employers to provide their employees with information and
training concerning chemical hazards and controls. The
federal OSHA Hazard Communication Standard, 1910.1200,
requires private employers to provide similar training and
information to their employees.
* Exposure to hazardous substances should be routinely
evaluated. This may include collecting personal and area
air samples. You can obtain copies of sampling results
from your employer. You have a legal right to this
information under OSHA 1910.1020.

WORKPLACE EXPOSURE LIMITS
OSHA:

The legal airborne permissible exposure limit
(PEL) is 20 ppm averaged over an 8-hour
workshift.

NIOSH:

The recommended airborne exposure limit is
2 ppm averaged over a 10-hour workshift.

ACGIH:

The recommended airborne exposure limit is
2 ppm averaged over an 8-hour workshift.

* Where possible, enclose operations and use local exhaust
ventilation at the site of chemical release. If local exhaust
ventilation or enclosure is not used, respirators should be
worn.
* Wear protective work clothing.
* Wash thoroughly immediately after exposure to 1-Chloro1-Nitropropane and at the end of the workshift.
* Post hazard and warning information in the work area. In
addition, as part of an ongoing education and training
effort, communicate all information on the health and
safety hazards of 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane to potentially
exposed workers.

page 2 of 6

1-CHLORO-1-NITROPROPANE
This Fact Sheet is a summary source of information of all
potential and most severe health hazards that may result from
exposure.
Duration of exposure, concentration of the
substance and other factors will affect your susceptibility to
any of the potential effects described below.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

If symptoms develop or overexposure is suspected, the
following are recommended:
* Consider chest x-ray after acute overexposure.
* Liver and kidney function tests.

Acute Health Effects

Any evaluation should include a careful history of past and
present symptoms with an exam. Medical tests that look for
damage already done are not a substitute for controlling
exposure.

The following acute (short-term) health effects may occur
immediately or shortly after exposure to 1-Chloro-1Nitropropane:

Request copies of your medical testing. You have a legal
right to this information under OSHA 1910.1020.

HEALTH HAZARD INFORMATION

* Contact can irritate and burn the skin and eyes.
* Breathing 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane can irritate the nose
and throat.
* Breathing 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane can irritate the lungs
causing coughing and/or shortness of breath. Higher
exposures can cause a build-up of fluid in the lungs
(pulmonary edema), a medical emergency, with severe
shortness of breath.

Chronic Health Effects
The following chronic (long-term) health effects can occur at
some time after exposure to 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane and
can last for months or years:

Cancer Hazard
* According to the information presently available to the
New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services,
1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane has not been tested for its
ability to cause cancer in animals.

Reproductive Hazard
* According to the information presently available to the
New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services,
1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane has not been tested for its
ability to affect reproduction.

Other Long-Term Effects
* 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane can irritate the lungs.
Repeated exposure may cause bronchitis to develop with
cough, phlegm, and/or shortness of breath.
* 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane may cause liver, kidney and
heart damage.

Mixed Exposures
* Because smoking can cause heart disease, as well as lung
cancer, emphysema, and other respiratory problems, it may
worsen respiratory conditions caused by chemical
exposure. Even if you have smoked for a long time,
stopping now will reduce your risk of developing health
problems.
* Because more than light alcohol consumption can cause
liver damage, drinking alcohol may increase the liver
damage caused by 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane.

WORKPLACE CONTROLS AND PRACTICES
Unless a less toxic chemical can be substituted for a hazardous
substance, ENGINEERING CONTROLS are the most
effective way of reducing exposure. The best protection is to
enclose operations and/or provide local exhaust ventilation at
the site of chemical release. Isolating operations can also
reduce exposure. Using respirators or protective equipment is
less effective than the controls mentioned above, but is
sometimes necessary.
In evaluating the controls present in your workplace, consider:
(1) how hazardous the substance is, (2) how much of the
substance is released into the workplace and (3) whether
harmful skin or eye contact could occur. Special controls
should be in place for highly toxic chemicals or when
significant skin, eye, or breathing exposures are possible.
In addition, the following control is recommended:

MEDICAL

* Where possible, automatically pump liquid 1-Chloro-1Nitropropane from drums or other storage containers to
process containers.

Medical Testing

Good WORK PRACTICES can help to reduce hazardous
exposures. The following work practices are recommended:

For those with frequent or potentially high exposure (half the
TLV or greater), the following are recommended before
beginning work and at regular times after that:
* Lung function tests.

* Workers whose clothing has been contaminated by
1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane should change into clean
clothing promptly.
* Contaminated work clothes should be laundered by
individuals who have been informed of the hazards of
exposure to 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane.

1-CHLORO-1-NITROPROPANE
* Eye wash fountains should be provided in the immediate
work area for emergency use.
* If there is the possibility of skin exposure, emergency
shower facilities should be provided.
* On skin contact with 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane,
immediately wash or shower to remove the chemical. At
the end of the workshift, wash any areas of the body that
may have contacted 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane, whether
or not known skin contact has occurred.
* Do not eat, smoke, or drink where 1-Chloro-1Nitropropane is handled, processed, or stored, since the
chemical can be swallowed. Wash hands carefully before
eating, drinking, smoking, or using the toilet.

PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT
WORKPLACE CONTROLS ARE BETTER THAN
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT. However, for
some jobs (such as outside work, confined space entry, jobs
done only once in a while, or jobs done while workplace
controls are being installed), personal protective equipment
may be appropriate.
OSHA 1910.132 requires employers to determine the
appropriate personal protective equipment for each hazard and
to train employees on how and when to use protective
equipment.
The following recommendations are only guidelines and may
not apply to every situation.

Clothing
* Avoid skin contact with 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane. Wear
protective gloves and clothing. Safety equipment
suppliers/ manufacturers can provide recommendations on
the most protective glove/clothing material for your
operation.
* All protective clothing (suits, gloves, footwear, headgear)
should be clean, available each day, and put on before
work.
* ACGIH recommends Butyl Rubber and Polyvinyl Alcohol
as protective materials.

Eye Protection
* Wear indirect-vent, impact and splash resistant goggles
when working with liquids.
* Wear a face shield along with goggles when working with
corrosive, highly irritating or toxic substances.
* Contact lenses should not be worn when working with this
substance.

Respiratory Protection
IMPROPER USE OF RESPIRATORS IS DANGEROUS.
Such equipment should only be used if the employer has a
written program that takes into account workplace conditions,
requirements for worker training, respirator fit testing and
medical exams, as described in OSHA 1910.134.

page 3 of 6
* For field applications check with your supervisor and your
safety equipment supplier regarding the appropriate
respiratory equipment.

page 4 of 6

1-CHLORO-1-NITROPROPANE
* Where the potential exists for exposure over 2 ppm, use a
MSHA/NIOSH approved supplied-air respirator with a full
facepiece operated in a pressure-demand or other positivepressure mode.
For increased protection use in
combination with an auxiliary self-contained breathing
apparatus operated in a pressure-demand or other positivepressure mode.
* Exposure to 100 ppm is immediately dangerous to life and
health. If the possibility of exposure above 100 ppm
exists, use a MSHA/NIOSH approved self-contained
breathing apparatus with a full facepiece operated in a
pressure-demand or other positive-pressure mode.

HANDLING AND STORAGE
* Prior to working with 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane you
should be trained on its proper handling and storage.
* 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane is not compatible with
OXIDIZING AGENTS (such as PERCHLORATES,
PEROXIDES, PERMANGANATES, CHLORATES,
NITRATES, CHLORINE, BROMINE and FLUORINE)
and STRONG ACIDS (such as HYDROCHLORIC,
SULFURIC and NITRIC).
* Store in tightly closed containers in a cool, well-ventilated
area away from HEAT.
* Sources of ignition, such as smoking and open flames, are
prohibited where 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane is used,
handled, or stored in a manner that could create a potential
fire or explosion hazard.
* Wherever 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane is used, handled,
manufactured, or stored, use explosion-proof electrical
equipment and fittings.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Q:
A:

Q:
A:

Q:
A:

Q:
A:

If I have acute health effects, will I later get chronic
health effects?
Not always. Most chronic (long-term) effects result
from repeated exposures to a chemical.
Can I get long-term effects without ever having shortterm effects?
Yes, because long-term effects can occur from repeated
exposures to a chemical at levels not high enough to
make you immediately sick.
What are my chances of getting sick when I have been
exposed to chemicals?
The likelihood of becoming sick from chemicals is
increased as the amount of exposure increases. This is
determined by the length of time and the amount of
material to which someone is exposed.
When are higher exposures more likely?
Conditions which increase risk of exposure include
physical and mechanical processes (heating, pouring,
spraying, spills and evaporation from large surface areas
such as open containers), and "confined space"
exposures (working inside vats, reactors, boilers, small
rooms, etc.).

Q:
A:

Is the risk of getting sick higher for workers than for
community residents?
Yes. Exposures in the community, except possibly in
cases of fires or spills, are usually much lower than those
found in the workplace. However, people in the
community may be exposed to contaminated water as
well as to chemicals in the air over long periods. This
may be a problem for children or people who are already
ill.

1-CHLORO-1-NITROPROPANE
--------------------------------------------------------------------------The following information is available from:
New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services
Occupational Health Service
PO Box 360
Trenton, NJ 08625-0360
(609) 984-1863
(609) 292-5677 (fax)
Web address:

http://www.state.nj.us/health/eoh/odisweb/

Industrial Hygiene Information
Industrial hygienists are available to answer your questions
regarding the control of chemical exposures using exhaust
ventilation, special work practices, good housekeeping, good
hygiene practices, and personal protective equipment
including respirators. In addition, they can help to interpret
the results of industrial hygiene survey data.
Medical Evaluation
If you think you are becoming sick because of exposure to
chemicals at your workplace, you may call personnel at the
Department of Health and Senior Services, Occupational
Health Service, who can help you find the information you
need.
Public Presentations
Presentations and educational programs on occupational
health or the Right to Know Act can be organized for labor
unions, trade associations and other groups.
Right to Know Information Resources
The Right to Know Infoline (609) 984-2202 can answer
questions about the identity and potential health effects of
chemicals, list of educational materials in occupational health,
references used to prepare the Fact Sheets, preparation of the
Right to Know survey, education and training programs,
labeling requirements, and general information regarding the
Right to Know Act. Violations of the law should be reported
to (609) 984-2202.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

page 5 of 6

1-CHLORO-1-NITROPROPANE

page 6 of 6

DEFINITIONS
ACGIH is the American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists. It recommends upper limits (called
TLVs) for exposure to workplace chemicals.

A mutagen is a substance that causes mutations. A mutation
is a change in the genetic material in a body cell. Mutations
can lead to birth defects, miscarriages, or cancer.

A carcinogen is a substance that causes cancer.

NAERG is the North American Emergency Response
Guidebook. It was jointly developed by Transport Canada,
the United States Department of Transportation and the
Secretariat of Communications and Transportation of Mexico.
It is a guide for first responders to quickly identify the specific
or generic hazards of material involved in a transportation
incident, and to protect themselves and the general public
during the initial response phase of the incident.

The CAS number is assigned by the Chemical Abstracts
Service to identify a specific chemical.
A combustible substance is a solid, liquid or gas that will
burn.
A corrosive substance is a gas, liquid or solid that causes
irreversible damage to human tissue or containers.
DEP is the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DOT is the Department of Transportation, the federal agency
that regulates the transportation of chemicals.
EPA is the Environmental Protection Agency, the federal
agency responsible for regulating environmental hazards.
A fetus is an unborn human or animal.
A flammable substance is a solid, liquid, vapor or gas that
will ignite easily and burn rapidly.
The flash point is the temperature at which a liquid or solid
gives off vapor that can form a flammable mixture with air.
HHAG is the Human Health Assessment Group of the federal
EPA.
IARC is the International Agency for Research on Cancer, a
scientific group that classifies chemicals according to their
cancer-causing potential.
A miscible substance is a liquid or gas that will evenly
dissolve in another.
mg/m3 means milligrams of a chemical in a cubic meter of
air. It is a measure of concentration (weight/volume).
MSHA is the Mine Safety and Health Administration, the
federal agency that regulates mining. It also evaluates and
approves respirators.

NCI is the National Cancer Institute, a federal agency that
determines the cancer-causing potential of chemicals.
NFPA is the National Fire Protection Association. It
classifies substances according to their fire and explosion
hazard.
NIOSH is the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health. It tests equipment, evaluates and approves respirators,
conducts studies of workplace hazards, and proposes
standards to OSHA.
NTP is the National Toxicology Program which tests
chemicals and reviews evidence for cancer.
OSHA is the Occupational Safety and Health Administration,
which adopts and enforces health and safety standards.
PEOSHA is the Public Employees Occupational Safety and
Health Act, a state law which sets PELs for New Jersey public
employees.
ppm means parts of a substance per million parts of air. It is a
measure of concentration by volume in air.
A reactive substance is a solid, liquid or gas that releases
energy under certain conditions.
A teratogen is a substance that causes birth defects by
damaging the fetus.
TLV is the Threshold Limit Value, the workplace exposure
limit recommended by ACGIH.
The vapor pressure is a measure of how readily a liquid or a
solid mixes with air at its surface. A higher vapor pressure
indicates a higher concentration of the substance in air and
therefore increases the likelihood of breathing it in.

page 6 of 6

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> E M E R G E N C Y I N F O R M A T I O N <<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<
Common Name:
DOT Number:
NAERG Code:
CAS Number:

1-CHLORO-1-NITROPROPANE

HANDLING AND STORAGE (See page 3)

None
No Citation
600-25-9

FIRST AID
In NJ, for POISON INFORMATION call 1-800-764-7661

Hazard rating
FLAMMABILITY
REACTIVITY

NJDHSS

NFPA

-

2

Eye Contact

-

3

* Immediately flush with large amounts of water for at least
15 minutes, occasionally lifting upper and lower lids. Seek
medical attention immediately.

COMBUSTIBLE
REACTIVE
POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE
CONTAINERS MAY EXPLODE IN FIRE
Hazard Rating Key: 0=minimal; 1=slight; 2=moderate;
3=serious; 4=severe

FIRE HAZARDS
* 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane is a COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID.
* Use alcohol foam extinguishers. Water can be used to keep
fire-exposed containers cool.
* POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE,
including Phosgene and Nitrogen Oxides.
* CONTAINERS MAY EXPLODE IN FIRE.
* If employees are expected to fight fires, they must be trained
and equipped as stated in OSHA 1910.156.

SPILLS AND EMERGENCIES
If 1-Chloro-1-Nitropropane is spilled or leaked, take the
following steps:
* Evacuate persons not wearing protective equipment from
area of spill or leak until clean-up is complete.
* Remove all ignition sources.
* Absorb liquids in vermiculite, dry sand, earth, or a similar
material and deposit in sealed containers.
* Ventilate and wash area after clean-up is complete.
* It may be necessary to contain and dispose of 1-Chloro-1Nitropropane as a HAZARDOUS WASTE. Contact your
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or your
regional office of the federal Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) for specific recommendations.
* If employees are required to clean-up spills, they must be
properly trained and equipped. OSHA 1910.120(q) may be
applicable.
=============================================
FOR LARGE SPILLS AND FIRES immediately call your fire
department. You can request emergency information from the
following:
CHEMTREC: (800) 424-9300
NJDEP HOTLINE: (609) 292-7172
=============================================

Skin Contact
* Quickly remove contaminated clothing. Immediately wash
area with large amounts of soap and water. Seek medical
attention immediately.

Breathing
* Remove the person from exposure.
* Begin rescue breathing (using universal precautions) if
breathing has stopped and CPR if heart action has stopped.
* Transfer promptly to a medical facility.
* Medical observation is recommended for 24 to 48 hours
after breathing overexposure, as pulmonary edema may be
delayed.

PHYSICAL DATA
Vapor Pressure: 6 mm Hg at 77oF (25oC)
Flash Point: 144oF (62oC)
Water Solubility: Slightly soluble
OTHER COMMONLY USED NAMES
Chemical Name:
Propane, 1-Chloro-1-Nitro-

Other Names:
Korax; Lanstan
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Not intended to be copied and sold for commercial
purposes.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND
SENIOR SERVICES
Right to Know Program
PO Box 368, Trenton, NJ 08625-0368
(609) 984-2202
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

