Right to Know

Hazardous Substance Fact Sheet
1-METHYL-2-PYRROLIDONE

Common Name:

Synonyms: N-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone

CAS Number:

872-50-4

Chemical Name: 2-Pyrrolidinone, 1-Methyl-

RTK Substance Number:

3716

Date: June 2008

DOT Number:

UN 1993

Description and Use
1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone is a colorless liquid with a mild, fishy
odor. It is used as a solvent in chemical processing, in paint
thinners, and in pharmaceutical applications.

Reasons for Citation
f 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone is on the Right to Know Hazardous

Substance List because it is cited by DOT, DEP, NFPA and
EPA.
f This chemical is on the Special Health Hazard Substance
List.

EMERGENCY RESPONDERS >>>> SEE BACK PAGE

Hazard Summary
Hazard Rating
NJDOH
HEALTH
FLAMMABILITY
REACTIVITY
TERATOGEN
COMBUSTIBLE
POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE

NFPA
2
2
0

Hazard Rating Key: 0=minimal; 1=slight; 2=moderate; 3=serious;
4=severe
f 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone can affect you when inhaled and

may be absorbed through the skin.
f 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone may be a TERATOGEN. HANDLE

WITH EXTREME CAUTION.
f Contact can irritate the skin and eyes.
f Inhaling 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone can irritate the nose and

throat.
f Exposure to 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone can cause headache,

stomach pain, nausea and vomiting.

SEE GLOSSARY ON PAGE 5.

FIRST AID

Workplace Exposure Limits

Eye Contact
f Immediately flush with large amounts of water for at least 15
minutes, lifting upper and lower lids. Remove contact
lenses, if worn, while rinsing.

No occupational exposure limits have been established for
1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone. However, it may pose a health risk.
Always follow safe work practices.

Skin Contact
f Quickly remove contaminated clothing. Immediately wash
contaminated skin with large amounts of soap and water.

contact with this chemical should be reduced to the lowest
possible level.
f It should be recognized that 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone may be
absorbed through your skin, thereby increasing your
exposure.

Inhalation
f Remove the person from exposure.
f Begin rescue breathing (using universal precautions) if
breathing has stopped and CPR if heart action has stopped.
f Transfer promptly to a medical facility.

EMERGENCY NUMBERS
Poison Control: 1-800-222-1222
CHEMTREC: 1-800-424-9300
NJDEP Hotline: 1-877-927-6337
National Response Center: 1-800-424-8802

f 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone may be a teratogen in humans. All

Page 2 of 6

1-METHYL-2-PYRROLIDONE
Determining Your Exposure
f Read the product manufacturer’s Material Safety Data

Sheet (MSDS) and the label to determine product
ingredients and important safety and health information
about the product mixture.
f For each individual hazardous ingredient, read the New

Jersey Department of Health Hazardous Substance Fact
Sheet, available on the RTK website
(www.nj.gov/health/eoh/rtkweb) or in your facility’s RTK
Central File or Hazard Communication Standard file.
f You have a right to this information under the New Jersey

Worker and Community Right to Know Act, the Public
Employees Occupational Safety and Health (PEOSH) Act
if you are a public worker in New Jersey, and under the
federal Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) if you
are a private worker.
f The New Jersey Right to Know Act requires most

employers to label chemicals in the workplace and
requires public employers to provide their employees with
information concerning chemical hazards and controls.
The federal OSHA Hazard Communication Standard (29
CFR 1910.1200) and the PEOSH Hazard Communication
Standard (N.J.A.C. 12:100-7) require employers to provide
similar information and training to their employees.
This Fact Sheet is a summary of available information
regarding the health hazards that may result from exposure.
Duration of exposure, concentration of the substance and other
factors will affect your susceptibility to any of the potential
effects described below.

Health Hazard Information
Acute Health Effects
The following acute (short-term) health effects may occur
immediately or shortly after exposure to 1-Methyl-2Pyrrolidone:
f Contact can irritate the skin and eyes.
f Inhaling 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone can irritate the nose and

throat causing coughing and wheezing.
f Exposure to 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone can cause headache,

stomach pain, nausea and vomiting.
Chronic Health Effects
The following chronic (long-term) health effects can occur at
some time after exposure to 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone and can
last for months or years:
Cancer Hazard
f According to the information presently available to the New
Jersey Department of Health,1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone has
been tested and has not been shown to cause cancer in
animals.

Reproductive Hazard
f 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone may be a TERATOGEN in humans
since it is a teratogen in animals.
Other Effects
f Prolonged or repeated contact can cause a skin rash,
blisters, dryness and redness.

Medical
Medical Testing
There is no special test for this chemical. However, seek
medical attention if illness occurs or overexposure is
suspected.
Any evaluation should include a careful history of past and
present symptoms with an exam. Medical tests that look for
damage already done are not a substitute for controlling
exposure.
Request copies of your medical testing. You have a legal right
to this information under the OSHA Access to Employee
Exposure and Medical Records Standard (29 CFR 1910.1020).

Page 3 of 6

1-METHYL-2-PYRROLIDONE
Workplace Controls and Practices
Very toxic chemicals, or those that are reproductive hazards or
sensitizers, require expert advice on control measures if a less
toxic chemical cannot be substituted. Control measures
include: (1) enclosing chemical processes for severely
irritating and corrosive chemicals, (2) using local exhaust
ventilation for chemicals that may be harmful with a single
exposure, and (3) using general ventilation to control
exposures to skin and eye irritants. For further information on
workplace controls, consult the NIOSH document on Control
Banding at www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/ctrlbanding/.
The following work practices are also recommended:
f Label process containers.
f Provide employees with hazard information and training.
f Monitor airborne chemical concentrations.
f Use engineering controls if concentrations exceed

recommended exposure levels.
f Provide eye wash fountains and emergency showers.
f Wash or shower if skin comes in contact with a hazardous
material.
f Always wash at the end of the workshift.
f Change into clean clothing if clothing becomes
contaminated.
f Do not take contaminated clothing home.
f Get special training to wash contaminated clothing.
f Do not eat, smoke, or drink in areas where chemicals are
being handled, processed or stored.
f Wash hands carefully before eating, smoking, drinking,
applying cosmetics or using the toilet.

Respiratory Protection
Improper use of respirators is dangerous. Respirators
should only be used if the employer has implemented a written
program that takes into account workplace conditions,
requirements for worker training, respirator fit testing, and
medical exams, as described in the OSHA Respiratory
Protection Standard (29 CFR 1910.134).
f Where the potential for overexposure exists, use a NIOSH

approved supplied-air respirator with a full facepiece
operated in a pressure-demand or other positive-pressure
mode. For increased protection use in combination with an
auxiliary self-contained breathing apparatus operated in a
pressure-demand or other positive-pressure mode.

Fire Hazards
If employees are expected to fight fires, they must be trained
and equipped as stated in the OSHA Fire Brigades Standard
(29 CFR 1910.156).
f 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone is a COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID.
f Use dry chemical, CO2, water spray or alcohol-resistant

foam as extinguishing agents.
f POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE, including

Nitrogen Oxides.
f Use water spray to keep fire-exposed containers cool.
f Vapors may travel to a source of ignition and flash back.
f Vapor is heavier than air and may travel a distance to cause

a fire or explosion far from the source.

Personal Protective Equipment
The OSHA Personal Protective Equipment Standard (29 CFR
1910.132) requires employers to determine the appropriate
personal protective equipment for each hazard and to train
employees on how and when to use protective equipment.
The following recommendations are only guidelines and may
not apply to every situation.
Gloves and Clothing
f Avoid skin contact with 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone. Wear
personal protective equipment made from material which
can not be permeated or degraded by this substance.
Safety equipment suppliers and manufacturers can provide
recommendations on the most protective glove and clothing
material for your operation.
f Safety equipment manufacturers recommend Butyl,
Neoprene over Natural Rubber, and Silver Shield®/4H® for
gloves and DuPont Tychem® fabrics; Kappler Zytron® 400;
and Saint-Gobain ONESuit® TEC, or the equivalent, as
protective materials for Amides.
f All protective clothing (suits, gloves, footwear, headgear)
should be clean, available each day, and put on before work.
Eye Protection
f Wear indirect-vent, impact and splash resistant goggles
when working with liquids.
f Wear a face shield along with goggles when working with
corrosive, highly irritating or toxic substances.

Page 4 of 6

1-METHYL-2-PYRROLIDONE
Spills and Emergencies
If employees are required to clean-up spills, they must be
properly trained and equipped. The OSHA Hazardous Waste
Operations and Emergency Response Standard (29 CFR
1910.120) may apply.
If 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone is spilled or leaked, take the
following steps:

Occupational Health Information
Resources
The New Jersey Department of Health offers multiple services
in occupational health. These services include providing
informational resources, educational materials, public
presentations, and industrial hygiene and medical
investigations and evaluations.

f Evacuate personnel and secure and control entrance to the

area.
f Eliminate all ignition sources.
f Absorb liquids in vermiculite, dry sand, earth, or a similar

material and deposit in sealed containers.
f Ventilate and wash area after clean-up is complete.
f DO NOT wash into sewer.
f It may be necessary to contain and dispose of 1-Methyl-2-

Pyrrolidone as a HAZARDOUS WASTE. Contact your
state Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or your
regional office of the federal Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) for specific recommendations.

Handling and Storage
Prior to working with 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone you should be
trained on its proper handling and storage.
f 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone is not compatible with OXIDIZING

AGENTS (such as PERCHLORATES, PEROXIDES,
PERMANGANATES, CHLORATES, NITRATES,
CHLORINE, BROMINE and FLUORINE); STRONG ACIDS
(such as HYDROCHLORIC, SULFURIC and NITRIC);
REDUCING AGENTS (such as LITHIUM, SODIUM,
ALUMINUM and their HYDRIDES); and STRONG BASES
(such as SODIUM HYDROXIDE and POTASSIUM
HYDROXIDE).
f Store in tightly closed containers in a cool, well-ventilated
area.
f Sources of ignition, such as smoking and open flames, are
prohibited where 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone is used, handled,
or stored in a manner that could create a potential fire or
explosion hazard.
f Metal containers involving the transfer of 1-Methyl-2Pyrrolidone should be grounded and bonded.
f 1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone attacks ALUMINUM, LIGHT
METALS, RUBBER and PLASTIC.

For more information, please contact:
New Jersey Department of Health
Right to Know
PO Box 368
Trenton, NJ 08625-0368
Phone: 609-984-2202
Fax: 609-984-7407
E-mail: rtk@doh.state.nj.us
Web address: http://www.nj.gov/health/eoh/rtkweb
The Right to Know Hazardous Substance Fact Sheets
are not intended to be copied and sold
for commercial purposes.

1-METHYL-2-PYRROLIDONE

Page 5 of 6

GLOSSARY
ACGIH is the American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists. They publish guidelines called Threshold Limit
Values (TLVs) for exposure to workplace chemicals.

LEL or Lower Explosive Limit, is the lowest concentration of
a combustible substance (gas or vapor) in the air capable of
continuing an explosion.

Acute Exposure Guideline Levels (AEGLs) are established
by the EPA. They describe the risk to humans resulting from
once-in-a lifetime, or rare, exposure to airborne chemicals.

mg/m3 means milligrams of a chemical in a cubic meter of air.
It is a measure of concentration (weight/volume).

Boiling point is the temperature at which a substance can
change its physical state from a liquid to a gas.

A mutagen is a substance that causes mutations. A mutation
is a change in the genetic material in a body cell. Mutations
can lead to birth defects, miscarriages, or cancer.

A carcinogen is a substance that causes cancer.
The CAS number is unique, identifying number, assigned by
the Chemical Abstracts Service, to a specific chemical.
CFR is the Code of Federal Regulations, which are the
regulations of the United States government.
A combustible substance is a solid, liquid or gas that will burn.
A corrosive substance is a gas, liquid or solid that causes
destruction of human skin or severe corrosion of containers.
DEP is the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.

NFPA is the National Fire Protection Association. It classifies
substances according to their fire and explosion hazard.
NIOSH is the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health. It tests equipment, evaluates and approves
respirators, conducts studies of workplace hazards, and
proposes standards to OSHA.
NTP is the National Toxicology Program which tests chemicals
and reviews evidence for cancer.
OSHA is the federal Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, which adopts and enforces health and safety
standards.

DOT is the Department of Transportation, the federal agency
that regulates the transportation of chemicals.

PEOSHA is the New Jersey Public Employees Occupational
Safety and Health Act, which adopts and enforces health and
safety standards in public workplaces.

EPA is the Environmental Protection Agency, the federal
agency responsible for regulating environmental hazards.

Permeated is the movement of chemicals through protective
materials.

ERG is the Emergency Response Guidebook. It is a guide for
emergency responders for transportation emergencies
involving hazardous substances.

PIH is a DOT designation for chemicals which are Poison
Inhalation Hazards.

Emergency Response Planning Guideline (ERPG) values
are intended to provide estimates of concentration ranges
where one reasonably might anticipate observing adverse
effects.
A fetus is an unborn human or animal.
A flammable substance is a solid, liquid, vapor or gas that will
ignite easily and burn rapidly.
The flash point is the temperature at which a liquid or solid
gives off vapor that can form a flammable mixture with air.

ppm means parts of a substance per million parts of air. It is a
measure of concentration by volume in air.
A reactive substance is a solid, liquid or gas that releases
energy under certain conditions.
STEL is a Short Term Exposure Limit which is usually a 15minute exposure that should not be exceeded at any time
during a work day.
A teratogen is a substance that causes birth defects by
damaging the fetus.

IARC is the International Agency for Research on Cancer, a
scientific group.

UEL or Upper Explosive Limit is the highest concentration in
air above which there is too much fuel (gas or vapor) to begin a
reaction or explosion.

Ionization Potential is the amount of energy needed to
remove an electron from an atom or molecule. It is measured
in electron volts.

Vapor Density is the ratio of the weight of a given volume of
one gas to the weight of another (usually Hydrogen), at the
same temperature and pressure.

IRIS is the Integrated Risk Information System database
maintained by federal EPA. The database contains
information on human health effects that may result from
exposure to various chemicals in the environment.

The vapor pressure is a measure of how readily a liquid or a
solid mixes with air at its surface. A higher vapor pressure
indicates a higher concentration of the substance in air and
therefore increases the likelihood of breathing it in.

Right to Know Hazardous Substance Fact Sheet
Common Name: 1-METHYL-2-PYRROLIDONE
Synonyms: N-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone
CAS No: 872-50-4
Molecular Formula: C5H9NO
RTK Substance No: 3716
Description: Colorless liquid with a mild, fishy odor

HAZARD DATA
Hazard Rating

Firefighting

Reactivity

2 - Health

1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone is a COMBUSTIBLE
LIQUID.
Use dry chemical, CO2, water spray or alcohol-resistant
foam as extinguishing agents.
POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE,
including Nitrogen Oxides.
Use water spray to keep fire-exposed containers cool.
Vapors may travel to a source of ignition and flash back.
Vapor is heavier than air and may travel a distance to
cause a fire or explosion far from the source.

1-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone is not compatible with
OXIDIZING AGENTS (such as PERCHLORATES,
PEROXIDES, PERMANGANATES, CHLORATES,
NITRATES, CHLORINE, BROMINE and
FLUORINE); STRONG ACIDS (such as
HYDROCHLORIC, SULFURIC and NITRIC);
REDUCING AGENTS (such as LITHIUM,
SODIUM, ALUMINUM and their HYDRIDES); and
STRONG BASES (such as SODIUM HYDROXIDE
and POTASSIUM HYDROXIDE).

2 - Fire
0 - Reactivity
DOT#: UN 1993
ERG Guide #: 128
Hazard Class: 3
(Flammable)

SPILL/LEAKS
Isolation Distance:
Small Spill: 60 meters (200 feet)
Large Spill: 300 meters (1,000 feet)
Fire: 800 meters (1/2 mile)
Absorb liquids in vermiculite, dry sand, earth, or a
similar material and deposit in sealed containers.
DO NOT wash into sewer.
Potential for bioconcentration is low.

PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
Odor Threshold:
Flash Point:
LEL:
UEL:
Auto Ignition Temp:
Vapor Density:
Vapor Pressure:
Specific Gravity:
Water Solubility:
Boiling Point:
Melting Point:
Molecular Weight:

EXPOSURE LIMITS
AIHA WEEL: 10 ppm, 8-hr TWA
(American Industrial Hygiene Association Workplace
Environmental Exposure Level)
May be absorbed through the skin.

PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT
Gloves:
Coveralls:
Respirator:

HEALTH EFFECTS
Eyes:
Skin:
Inhalation:

Irritation
Irritation, rash, blisters, dryness and
redness
Nose and throat irritation with coughing
and wheezing
Headache, stomach pain, nausea and
vomiting

Mild fishy or amine odor
204oF (96oC)
1%
9.5%
518oF (270oC)
3.4 (air = 1)
0.5 mm Hg at 77oF (25oC)
1.03 (water = 1)
Soluble
396oF (202oC)
-13oF (-25oC)
99.1

Butyl, Neoprene over Natural Rubber, and Silver
Shield®/4H®
DuPont Tychem ® fabrics; Kappler Zytron® 400; SaintGobain ONESuit® TEC for Amides (>8-hr breakthrough)
>10 ppm - Full facepiece APR with Organic vapor filter
>100 ppm - Supplied air

FIRST AID AND DECONTAMINATION
Remove the person from exposure.
Flush eyes with large amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. Remove
contact lenses if worn.
Quickly remove contaminated clothing and wash contaminated skin with
large amounts of soap and water.
Begin artificial respiration if breathing has stopped and CPR if
necessary.
Transfer promptly to a medical facility.
June 2008

