Common Name: 1-NAPHTHYLAMINE
CAS Number: 134-32-7
DOT Number: UN 2077
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

RTK Substance number: 1325
Date: April 1997
Revision: April 2004
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

HAZARD SUMMARY

WORKPLACE EXPOSURE LIMITS

* 1-Naphthylamine can affect you when breathed in and by
passing through your skin.
* 1-Naphthylamine may cause mutations. Handle with
extreme caution.
* Contact can irritate the skin and eyes.
* High levels can interfere with the ability of the blood to
carry Oxygen causing headache, fatigue, dizziness, and a
blue color to the skin and lips (methemoglobinemia).
Higher levels can cause trouble breathing, collapse and
even death.

OSHA:

No exposure limit has been established by OSHA
for 1-Naphthylamine. Please refer to the OSHA
Standard: 29 CFR 1910.1003.

NIOSH:

Recommends that exposure to occupational
carcinogens be limited to the lowest feasible
concentration.

* It should be recognized that 1-Naphthylamine can be
absorbed through your skin, thereby increasing your
exposure.

IDENTIFICATION
1-Naphthylamine is a white or yellow crystalline (sand-like)
material, which turns purplish-red upon exposure to air. It is
used in dye and rubber manufacturing, and to control weeds.

REASON FOR CITATION
* 1-Naphthylamine is on the Hazardous Substance List
because it is regulated by OSHA and cited by DOT,
NIOSH, DEP, IARC, NFPA and EPA.
* Definitions are provided on page 5.

HOW TO DETERMINE IF YOU ARE BEING
EXPOSED
The New Jersey Right to Know Act requires most employers
to label chemicals in the workplace and requires public
employers to provide their employees with information and
training concerning chemical hazards and controls. The
federal OSHA Hazard Communication Standard, 1910.1200,
requires private employers to provide similar training and
information to their employees.
* Exposure to hazardous substances should be routinely
evaluated. This may include collecting personal and area
air samples. You can obtain copies of sampling results
from your employer. You have a legal right to this
information under OSHA 1910.1020.
* If you think you are experiencing any work-related health
problems, see a doctor trained to recognize occupational
diseases. Take this Fact Sheet with you.

WAYS OF REDUCING EXPOSURE
* Enclose operations and use local exhaust ventilation at the
site of chemical release. If local exhaust ventilation or
enclosure is not used, respirators should be worn.
* A regulated, marked area should be established where
1-Naphthylamine is handled, used, or stored as required
by the OSHA Standard: 29 CFR 1910.1003.
* Wear protective work clothing.
* Wash thoroughly immediately after exposure to
1-Naphthylamine and at the end of the workshift.
* Post hazard and warning information in the work area. In
addition, as part of an ongoing education and training
effort, communicate all information on the health and
safety hazards of 1-Naphthylamine to potentially exposed
workers.

1-NAPHTHYLAMINE
This Fact Sheet is a summary source of information of all
potential and most severe health hazards that may result from
exposure. Duration of exposure, concentration of the substance
and other factors will affect your susceptibility to any of the
potential effects described below.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

HEALTH HAZARD INFORMATION
Acute Health Effects
The following acute (short-term) health effects may occur
immediately or shortly after exposure to 1-Naphthylamine:
* Contact can irritate the skin and eyes.
* High levels can interfere with the ability of the blood to
carry Oxygen causing headache, fatigue, dizziness, and a
blue color to the skin and lips (methemoglobinemia).
Higher levels can cause trouble breathing, collapse and
even death.

Chronic Health Effects
The following chronic (long-term) health effects can occur at
some time after exposure to 1-Naphthylamine and can last for
months or years:

Cancer Hazard
* A report of excess bladder cancer among individuals who
worked with 1-Naphthylamine was published. This may
be due to contamination with 2-Naphthylamine, which is a
human bladder carcinogen.
* 1-Naphthylamine may cause mutations (genetic changes).
Whether or not it poses a cancer or reproductive hazard
needs further study.

Reproductive Hazard
* According to the information presently available to the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services,
1-Naphthylamine has not been tested for its ability to
affect reproduction.

Other Long-Term Effects
* 1-Naphthylamine has not been tested for other chronic
(long-term) health effects.

MEDICAL
Medical Testing
If symptoms develop or overexposure is suspected, the
following is recommended:
* Blood methemoglobin level.
Any evaluation should include a careful history of past and
present symptoms with an exam. Medical tests that look for
damage already done are not a substitute for controlling
exposure.
Request copies of your medical testing. You have a legal right
to this information under OSHA 1910.1020.

page 2 of 6

WORKPLACE CONTROLS AND PRACTICES
Unless a less toxic chemical can be substituted for a hazardous
substance, ENGINEERING CONTROLS are the most
effective way of reducing exposure. The best protection is to
enclose operations and/or provide local exhaust ventilation at
the site of chemical release. Isolating operations can also
reduce exposure. Using respirators or protective equipment is
less effective than the controls mentioned above, but is
sometimes necessary.
In evaluating the controls present in your workplace, consider:
(1) how hazardous the substance is, (2) how much of the
substance is released into the workplace and (3) whether
harmful skin or eye contact could occur. Special controls
should be in place for highly toxic chemicals or when
significant skin, eye, or breathing exposures are possible.
In addition, the following controls are recommended:
* Where possible, automatically transfer 1-Naphthylamine
from drums or other storage containers to process
containers.
* Specific engineering controls are required for this chemical
by OSHA. Refer to the OSHA Standard: 29 CFR
1910.1003 for alpha-Naphthylamine.
Good WORK PRACTICES can help to reduce hazardous
exposures. The following work practices are recommended:
* Workers whose clothing has been contaminated by
1-Naphthylamine should change into clean clothing
promptly.
* Do not take contaminated work clothes home. Family
members could be exposed.
* Contaminated work clothes should be laundered by
individuals who have been informed of the hazards of
exposure to 1-Naphthylamine.
* Eye wash fountains should be provided in the immediate
work area for emergency use.
* If there is the possibility of skin exposure, emergency
shower facilities should be provided.
* On skin contact with 1-Naphthylamine, immediately wash
or shower to remove the chemical. At the end of the
workshift, wash any areas of the body that may have
contacted 1-Naphthylamine, whether or not known skin
contact has occurred.
* Do not eat, smoke, or drink where 1-Naphthylamine is
handled, processed, or stored, since the chemical can be
swallowed. Wash hands carefully before eating, drinking,
smoking, or using the toilet.
* Use a vacuum or a wet method to reduce dust during cleanup. DO NOT DRY SWEEP.
* When vacuuming, a high efficiency particulate air (HEPA)
filter should be used, not a standard shop vacuum.

1-NAPHTHYLAMINE
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT
WORKPLACE CONTROLS ARE BETTER THAN
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT. However, for
some jobs (such as outside work, confined space entry, jobs
done only once in a while, or jobs done while workplace
controls are being installed), personal protective equipment
may be appropriate.
OSHA 1910.132 requires employers to determine the
appropriate personal protective equipment for each hazard and
to train employees on how and when to use protective
equipment.
The following recommendations are only guidelines and may
not apply to every situation.

Clothing
* Avoid skin contact with 1-Naphthylamine.
Wear
protective gloves and clothing. Safety equipment
suppliers/manufacturers can provide recommendations on
the most protective glove/clothing material for your
operation.
* All protective clothing (suits, gloves, footwear, headgear)
should be clean, available each day, and put on before
work.

Eye Protection
* Eye protection is included in the recommended respiratory
protection.
* Contact lenses should not be worn when working with this
substance.

Respiratory Protection
IMPROPER USE OF RESPIRATORS IS DANGEROUS.
Such equipment should only be used if the employer has a
written program that takes into account workplace conditions,
requirements for worker training, respirator fit testing and
medical exams, as described in OSHA 1910.134.
* Engineering controls must be effective to ensure that
exposure to 1-Naphthylamine does not occur.
* At any exposure level, use a NIOSH approved supplied-air
respirator with a full facepiece operated in a pressuredemand or other positive-pressure mode. For increased
protection use in combination with an auxiliary selfcontained breathing apparatus operated in a pressuredemand or other positive-pressure mode.

page 3 of 6

* 1-Naphthylamine is not compatible with OXIDIZING
AGENTS (such as PERCHLORATES, PEROXIDES,
PERMANGANATES,
CHLORATES,
NITRATES,
CHLORINE, BROMINE and FLUORINE); STRONG
ACIDS (such as HYDROCHLORIC, SULFURIC and
NITRIC); ACID ANHYDRIDES; and ISOCYANATES.
* Store in tightly closed containers in a cool, well-ventilated
area away from LIGHT.
* Sources of ignition, such as smoking and open flames, are
prohibited where 1-Naphthylamine is used, handled, or
stored in a manner that could create a potential fire or
explosion hazard.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Q:
A:

Q:
A:

Q:
A:

Can I get long-term effects without ever having shortterm effects?
Yes, because long-term effects can occur from repeated
exposures to a chemical at levels not high enough to make
you immediately sick.
What are my chances of getting sick when I have been
exposed to chemicals?
The likelihood of becoming sick from chemicals is
increased as the amount of exposure increases. This is
determined by the length of time and the amount of
material to which someone is exposed.

Q:
A:

When are higher exposures more likely?
Conditions which increase risk of exposure include dust
releasing operations (grinding, mixing, blasting, dumping,
etc.), other physical and mechanical processes (heating,
pouring, spraying, spills and evaporation from large
surface areas such as open containers), and "confined
space" exposures (working inside vats, reactors, boilers,
small rooms, etc.).

Q:

Is the risk of getting sick higher for workers than for
community residents?
Yes. Exposures in the community, except possibly in
cases of fires or spills, are usually much lower than those
found in the workplace.
However, people in the
community may be exposed to contaminated water as well
as to chemicals in the air over long periods. This may be
a problem for children or people who are already ill.

A:

HANDLING AND STORAGE
* Prior to working with 1-Naphthylamine you should be
trained on its proper handling and storage.
* A regulated, marked area should be established where
1-Naphthylamine is handled, used, or stored as required by
the OSHA Standard: 29 CFR 1910.1003.

If I have acute health effects, will I later get chronic
health effects?
Not always. Most chronic (long-term) effects result from
repeated exposures to a chemical.

Q:
A:

Don't all chemicals cause cancer?
No. Most chemicals tested by scientists are not cancercausing.

1-NAPHTHYLAMINE
Q:
A:

Q:
A:

Q:
A:

Should I be concerned if a chemical causes cancer in
animals?
Yes. Most scientists agree that a chemical that causes
cancer in animals should be treated as a suspected human
carcinogen unless proven otherwise.
But don't they test animals using much higher levels of a
chemical than people usually are exposed to?
Yes. That's so effects can be seen more clearly using
fewer animals. But high doses alone don't cause cancer
unless it's a cancer agent. In fact, a chemical that causes
cancer in animals at high doses could cause cancer in
humans exposed to low doses.
What are the likely health problems from chemicals which
cause mutations?
There are two primary health concerns associated with
mutagens: (1) cancers can result from changes induced in
cells and, (2) adverse reproductive and developmental
outcomes can result from damage to the egg and sperm
cells.

page 4 of 6
-------------------------------------------------------------------------The following information is available from:
New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services
Occupational Health Service
PO Box 360
Trenton, NJ 08625-0360
(609) 984-1863
(609) 984-7407 (fax)
Web address:

http://www.state.nj.us/health/eoh/odisweb/

Industrial Hygiene Information
Industrial hygienists are available to answer your questions
regarding the control of chemical exposures using exhaust
ventilation, special work practices, good housekeeping, good
hygiene practices, and personal protective equipment including
respirators. In addition, they can help to interpret the results of
industrial hygiene survey data.
Medical Evaluation
If you think you are becoming sick because of exposure to
chemicals at your workplace, you may call personnel at the
Department of Health and Senior Services, Occupational
Health Service, who can help you find the information you
need.
Public Presentations
Presentations and educational programs on occupational health
or the Right to Know Act can be organized for labor unions,
trade associations and other groups.
Right to Know Information Resources
The Right to Know Infoline (609) 984-2202 can answer
questions about the identity and potential health effects of
chemicals, list of educational materials in occupational health,
references used to prepare the Fact Sheets, preparation of the
Right to Know Survey, education and training programs,
labeling requirements, and general information regarding the
Right to Know Act. Violations of the law should be reported to
(609) 984-2202.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-NAPHTHYLAMINE

page 5 of 6

DEFINITIONS

The CAS number is assigned by the Chemical Abstracts
Service to identify a specific chemical.

NAERG is the North American Emergency Response
Guidebook. It was jointly developed by Transport Canada, the
United States Department of Transportation and the Secretariat
of Communications and Transportation of Mexico. It is a
guide for first responders to quickly identify the specific or
generic hazards of material involved in a transportation
incident, and to protect themselves and the general public
during the initial response phase of the incident.

CFR is the Code of Federal Regulations, which consists of the
regulations of the United States government.

NFPA is the National Fire Protection Association. It classifies
substances according to their fire and explosion hazard.

A combustible substance is a solid, liquid or gas that will burn.
A corrosive substance is a gas, liquid or solid that causes
irreversible damage to human tissue or containers.

NIOSH is the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health. It tests equipment, evaluates and approves respirators,
conducts studies of workplace hazards, and proposes standards
to OSHA.

DEP is the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.

NTP is the National Toxicology Program which tests
chemicals and reviews evidence for cancer.

DOT is the Department of Transportation, the federal agency
that regulates the transportation of chemicals.

OSHA is the Occupational Safety and Health Administration,
which adopts and enforces health and safety standards.

EPA is the Environmental Protection Agency, the federal
agency responsible for regulating environmental hazards.

PEL is the Permissible Exposure Limit which is enforceable by
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

A fetus is an unborn human or animal.

PIH is a DOT designation for chemicals which are Poison
Inhalation Hazards.

ACGIH is the American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists. It recommends upper limits (called
TLVs) for exposure to workplace chemicals.
A carcinogen is a substance that causes cancer.

A flammable substance is a solid, liquid, vapor or gas that will
ignite easily and burn rapidly.
The flash point is the temperature at which a liquid or solid
gives off vapor that can form a flammable mixture with air.
IARC is the International Agency for Research on Cancer, a
scientific group that classifies chemicals according to their
cancer-causing potential.
IRIS is the Integrated Risk Information System database of the
federal EPA.
A miscible substance is a liquid or gas that will evenly dissolve
in another.
mg/m3 means milligrams of a chemical in a cubic meter of air.
It is a measure of concentration (weight/volume).
A mutagen is a substance that causes mutations. A mutation is
a change in the genetic material in a body cell. Mutations can
lead to birth defects, miscarriages, or cancer.

ppm means parts of a substance per million parts of air. It is a
measure of concentration by volume in air.
A reactive substance is a solid, liquid or gas that releases
energy under certain conditions.
STEL is a Short Term Exposure Limit which is usually a 15minute exposure that should not be exceeded at any time during
a work day.
A teratogen is a substance that causes birth defects by
damaging the fetus.
TLV is the Threshold Limit Value, the workplace exposure
limit recommended by ACGIH.
The vapor pressure is a measure of how readily a liquid or a
solid mixes with air at its surface. A higher vapor pressure
indicates a higher concentration of the substance in air and
therefore increases the likelihood of breathing it in.

page 6 of 6

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> E M E R G E N C Y I N F O R M A T I O N <<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<
Common Name:
DOT Number:
NAERG Code:
CAS Number:

1-NAPHTHYLAMINE

HANDLING AND STORAGE (See page 3)

UN 2077
153
134-32-7

FIRST AID
For POISON INFORMATION call 1-800-222-1222

Hazard rating
FLAMMABILITY
REACTIVITY

NJDHSS

NFPA

-

1

0
POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE
CONTAINERS MAY EXPLODE IN FIRE
Hazard Rating Key: 0=minimal; 1=slight; 2=moderate;
3=serious; 4=severe

FIRE HAZARDS
* 1-Naphthylamine may burn, but does not readily ignite.
* Use dry chemical, CO2, alcohol or polymer foam
extinguishers.
* POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE,
including Nitrogen Oxides.
* CONTAINERS MAY EXPLODE IN FIRE.
* Use water spray to keep fire-exposed containers cool.
* If employees are expected to fight fires, they must be
trained and equipped as stated in OSHA 1910.156.

SPILLS AND EMERGENCIES
If 1-Naphthylamine is spilled, take the following steps:
* Evacuate persons not wearing protective equipment from
area of spill until clean-up is complete.
* Remove all ignition sources.
* Cover with dry lime, sand or soda ash, and place in covered
containers for disposal.
* Ventilate and wash area after clean-up is complete.
* It may be necessary to contain and dispose of 1Naphthylamine as a HAZARDOUS WASTE. Contact
your state Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
or your regional office of the federal Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) for specific recommendations.
* If employees are required to clean-up spills, they must be
properly trained and equipped. OSHA 1910.120(q) may be
applicable.
=============================================
FOR LARGE SPILLS AND FIRES immediately call your fire
department. You can request emergency information from the
following:
CHEMTREC: (800) 424-9300
NJDEP HOTLINE: 1-877-WARN-DEP
=============================================

Eye Contact
* Immediately flush with large amounts of water for at least
15 minutes, occasionally lifting upper and lower lids. Seek
medical attention immediately.

Skin Contact
* Quickly remove contaminated clothing. Immediately wash
contaminated skin with large amounts of soap and water.

Breathing
* Remove the person from exposure.
* Begin rescue breathing (using universal precautions) if
breathing has stopped and CPR if heart action has stopped.
* Transfer promptly to a medical facility.

PHYSICAL DATA
Vapor Pressure: 1 mm Hg at 220oF (105oC)
Flash Point: 315oF (166.5oC)
Water Solubility: Insoluble
OTHER COMMONLY USED NAMES
Chemical Name:
1-Naphthalenamine

Other Names:
1-Aminonaphthalene; alpha-Naphthylamine; Fast Garnet B
Base
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Not intended to be copied and sold for commercial
purposes.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND
SENIOR SERVICES
Right to Know Program
PO Box 368, Trenton, NJ 08625-0368
(609) 984-2202
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

