Right to Know

Hazardous Substance Fact Sheet
Common Name:

1-NITROPROPANE

Synonym: 1-NP

CAS Number:

108-03-2

Chemical Name: Propane, 1-Nitro-

RTK Substance Number:

1394

Date: September 1999

DOT Number:

UN 2608

Revision: August 2009

Description and Use
1-Nitropropane is a colorless liquid with a mild, fruity odor. It
is used to make other chemicals, and as a solvent, gasoline
additive and rocket propellant.
f ODOR THRESHOLD = 11 ppm
f Odor thresholds vary greatly. Do not rely on odor alone to

determine potentially hazardous exposures.

Reasons for Citation

EMERGENCY RESPONDERS >>>> SEE LAST PAGE

Hazard Summary
Hazard Rating
NJDOH
HEALTH
FLAMMABILITY
REACTIVITY
FLAMMABLE AND REACTIVE
POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE
CONTAINERS MAY EXPLODE IN FIRE

NFPA
1
3
2

f 1-Nitropropane is on the Right to Know Hazardous

Hazard Rating Key: 0=minimal; 1=slight; 2=moderate; 3=serious;
4=severe

Substance List because it is cited by OSHA, ACGIH, DOT,
NIOSH and NFPA.
f This chemical is on the Special Health Hazard Substance
List.

f 1-Nitropropane can affect you when inhaled.
f Contact can irritate the skin and eyes.
f Inhaling 1-Nitropropane can irritate the nose, throat and

lungs.
f High levels of this substance can reduce the blood’s ability to

SEE GLOSSARY ON PAGE 5.

FIRST AID
Eye Contact
f Immediately flush with large amounts of water for at least 15
minutes, lifting upper and lower lids. Remove contact
lenses, if worn, while rinsing.
Skin Contact
f Remove contaminated clothing and wash contaminated skin
with soap and water.
Inhalation
f Remove the person from exposure.
f Begin rescue breathing (using universal precautions) if
breathing has stopped and CPR if heart action has stopped.
f Transfer promptly to a medical facility.

EMERGENCY NUMBERS
Poison Control: 1-800-222-1222
CHEMTREC: 1-800-424-9300
NJDEP Hotline: 1-877-927-6337
National Response Center: 1-800-424-8802

transport Oxygen, causing headache, fatigue, dizziness, and
a blue color to the skin and lips (methemoglobinemia).
f Exposure can cause headache, dizziness and loss of
coordination .
f 1-Nitropropane can cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and
abdominal pain.
f 1-Nitropropane may damage the liver and kidneys.
f 1-Nitropropane is FLAMMABLE and REACTIVE and a
DANGEROUS FIRE and EXPLOSION HAZARD.

Workplace Exposure Limits
OSHA: The legal airborne permissible exposure limit (PEL) is
25 ppm averaged over an 8-hour workshift.
NIOSH: The recommended airborne exposure limit (REL) is
25 ppm averaged over a 10-hour workshift.
ACGIH: The threshold limit value (TLV) is 25 ppm averaged
over an 8-hour workshift.

Page 2 of 6

1-NITROPROPANE
Determining Your Exposure
f Read the product manufacturer’s Material Safety Data

Sheet (MSDS) and the label to determine product
ingredients and important safety and health information
about the product mixture.
f For each individual hazardous ingredient, read the New

Jersey Department of Health Hazardous Substance Fact
Sheet, available on the RTK website
(www.nj.gov/health/eoh/rtkweb) or in your facility’s RTK
Central File or Hazard Communication Standard file.
f You have a right to this information under the New Jersey

Worker and Community Right to Know Act, the Public
Employees Occupational Safety and Health (PEOSH) Act
if you are a public worker in New Jersey, and under the
federal Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) if you
are a private worker.
f The New Jersey Right to Know Act requires most

employers to label chemicals in the workplace and
requires public employers to provide their employees with
information concerning chemical hazards and controls.
The federal OSHA Hazard Communication Standard (29
CFR 1910.1200) and the PEOSH Hazard Communication
Standard (N.J.A.C. 12:100-7) require employers to provide
similar information and training to their employees.
This Fact Sheet is a summary of available information
regarding the health hazards that may result from exposure.
Duration of exposure, concentration of the substance and other
factors will affect your susceptibility to any of the potential
effects described below.

Health Hazard Information
Acute Health Effects
The following acute (short-term) health effects may occur
immediately or shortly after exposure to 1-Nitropropane:
f Contact can irritate the skin and eyes.
f Inhaling 1-Nitropropane can irritate the nose, throat and

lungs causing coughing, wheezing and/or shortness of
breath.
f High levels of this substance can reduce the blood’s ability to
transport Oxygen, causing headache, fatigue, dizziness, and
a blue color to the skin and lips (methemoglobinemia).
Exposure to very high levels can cause trouble breathing,
collapse and even death.
f Exposure can cause headache, dizziness, weakness, loss of
coordination and restlessness.
f 1-Nitropropane can cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and
abdominal pain.

Chronic Health Effects
The following chronic (long-term) health effects can occur at
some time after exposure to 1-Nitropropane and can last for
months or years:
Cancer Hazard
f There is no evidence that 1-Nitropropane causes cancer in
animals. This is based on test results presently available to
the NJDOH from published studies.
Reproductive Hazard
f According to the information presently available to the New
Jersey Department of Health, 1-Nitropropane has not been
tested for its ability to affect reproduction.
Other Effects
f 1-Nitropropane may damage the liver and kidneys.

Medical
Medical Testing
For frequent or potentially high exposure (half the PEL or
greater), the following are recommended before beginning
work and at regular times after that:
f Liver and kidney function tests

If symptoms develop or overexposure is suspected, the
following is recommended:
f Blood methemoglobin level

Any evaluation should include a careful history of past and
present symptoms with an exam. Medical tests that look for
damage already done are not a substitute for controlling
exposure.
Request copies of your medical testing. You have a legal right
to this information under the OSHA Access to Employee
Exposure and Medical Records Standard (29 CFR 1910.1020).
Mixed Exposures
f More than light alcohol consumption can cause liver
damage. Drinking alcohol can increase the liver damage
caused by 1-Nitropropane.

Page 3 of 6

1-NITROPROPANE
Workplace Controls and Practices
Very toxic chemicals, or those that are reproductive hazards or
sensitizers, require expert advice on control measures if a less
toxic chemical cannot be substituted. Control measures
include: (1) enclosing chemical processes for severely
irritating and corrosive chemicals, (2) using local exhaust
ventilation for chemicals that may be harmful with a single
exposure, and (3) using general ventilation to control
exposures to skin and eye irritants. For further information on
workplace controls, consult the NIOSH document on Control
Banding at www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/ctrlbanding/.
The following work practices are also recommended:
f Label process containers.
f Provide employees with hazard information and training.
f Monitor airborne chemical concentrations.
f Use engineering controls if concentrations exceed

f All protective clothing (suits, gloves, footwear, headgear)

should be clean, available each day, and put on before work.
Eye Protection
f Wear indirect-vent, impact and splash resistant goggles
when working with liquids.
f If additional protection is needed for the entire face, use in
combination with a face shield. A face shield should not be
used without another type of eye protection.
Respiratory Protection
Improper use of respirators is dangerous. Respirators
should only be used if the employer has implemented a written
program that takes into account workplace conditions,
requirements for worker training, respirator fit testing, and
medical exams, as described in the OSHA Respiratory
Protection Standard (29 CFR 1910.134).

recommended exposure levels.
f Provide eye wash fountains and emergency showers.
f Wash or shower if skin comes in contact with a hazardous

material.
f Always wash at the end of the workshift.
f Change into clean clothing if clothing becomes
contaminated.
f Do not take contaminated clothing home.
f Get special training to wash contaminated clothing.
f Do not eat, smoke, or drink in areas where chemicals are
being handled, processed or stored.
f Wash hands carefully before eating, smoking, drinking,
applying cosmetics or using the toilet.

f Where the potential exists for exposure over 25 ppm, use a

NIOSH approved supplied-air respirator with a full facepiece
operated in a pressure-demand or other positive-pressure
mode. For increased protection use in combination with an
auxiliary self-contained breathing apparatus or an
emergency escape air cylinder.
f Exposure to 1,000 ppm is immediately dangerous to life and
health. If the possibility of exposure above 1,000 ppm
exists, use a NIOSH approved self-contained breathing
apparatus with a full facepiece operated in a pressuredemand or other positive-pressure mode equipped with an
emergency escape air cylinder.

In addition, the following may be useful or required:
f Before entering a confined space where 1-Nitropropane

may be present, check to make sure that an explosive
concentration does not exist.
f Where possible, transfer 1-Nitropropane from drums or
other containers to process containers in an enclosed
system.

Fire Hazards
If employees are expected to fight fires, they must be trained
and equipped as stated in the OSHA Fire Brigades Standard
(29 CFR 1910.156).
f 1-Nitropropane is a FLAMMABLE LIQUID.
f Use CO2, water spray or alcohol-resistant foam as

extinguishing agents.
f POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE, including

Personal Protective Equipment
The OSHA Personal Protective Equipment Standard (29 CFR
1910.132) requires employers to determine the appropriate
personal protective equipment for each hazard and to train
employees on how and when to use protective equipment.
The following recommendations are only guidelines and may
not apply to every situation.
Gloves and Clothing
f Avoid skin contact with 1-Nitropropane. Wear personal
protective equipment made from material which can not be
permeated or degraded by this substance. Safety
equipment suppliers and manufacturers can provide
recommendations on the most protective glove and clothing
material for your operation.
f Safety equipment manufacturers recommend Butyl,
Polyvinyl Alcohol, Silver Shield®/4H® and Barrier® as glove
materials, and Tychem® Responder® and TK, or the
equivalent, as protective clothing materials.

Nitrogen Oxides.
f CONTAINERS MAY EXPLODE IN FIRE.
f Use water spray to keep fire-exposed containers cool.
f Vapor is heavier than air and may travel a distance to cause

a fire or explosion far from the source.
f Flow or agitation may generate electrostatic charges.
f 1-Nitropropane may form an ignitable vapor/air mixture in

closed tanks or containers.

Page 4 of 6

1-NITROPROPANE
Spills and Emergencies
If employees are required to clean-up spills, they must be
properly trained and equipped. The OSHA Hazardous Waste
Operations and Emergency Response Standard (29 CFR
1910.120) may apply.
If 1-Nitropropane is spilled or leaked, take the following steps:

Occupational Health Information
Resources
The New Jersey Department of Health offers multiple services
in occupational health. These services include providing
informational resources, educational materials, public
presentations, and industrial hygiene and medical
investigations and evaluations.

f Evacuate personnel and secure and control entrance to the

area.
f Eliminate all ignition sources.
f Absorb liquids in vermiculite, dry sand, earth, or a similar

material and place into sealed containers for disposal.
f Ventilate area of spill or leak.
f Keep 1-Nitropropane out of confined spaces, such as

sewers, because of the possibility of an explosion.
f Use water spray to keep containers cool and to knock-down

vapors.
f DO NOT wash into sewer.
f It may be necessary to contain and dispose of

1-Nitropropane as a HAZARDOUS WASTE. Contact your
state Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or your
regional office of the federal Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) for specific recommendations.

Handling and Storage
Prior to working with 1-Nitropropane you should be trained on
its proper handling and storage.
f 1-Nitropropane reacts violently with OXIDIZING AGENTS

(such as PERCHLORATES, PEROXIDES,
PERMANGANATES, CHLORATES, NITRATES,
CHLORINE, BROMINE and FLUORINE) and STRONG
BASES (such as SODIUM HYDROXIDE, POTASSIUM
HYDROXIDE and CALCIUM HYDROXIDE).
f 1-Nitropropane is not compatible with METAL OXIDES;
AMINES; STRONG ACIDS (such as HYDROCHLORIC,
SULFURIC and NITRIC); and HYDROCARBONS.
f Store in tightly closed containers in a cool, well-ventilated
area away from HEAT and COMBUSTIBLES.
f 1-Nitropropane attacks some forms of PLASTICS,
RUBBER and COATINGS.
f Sources of ignition, such as smoking and open flames, are
prohibited where 1-Nitropropane is used, handled, or
stored.
f Metal containers involving the transfer of 1-Nitropropane
should be grounded and bonded.
f Use explosion-proof electrical equipment and fittings
wherever 1-Nitropropane is used, handled, manufactured,
or stored.
f Use only non-sparking tools and equipment, especially when
opening and closing containers of 1-Nitropropane.
f 1-Nitropropane may accumulate static electricity when
being filled into properly grounded containers.

For more information, please contact:
New Jersey Department of Health
Right to Know
PO Box 368
Trenton, NJ 08625-0368
Phone: 609-984-2202
Fax: 609-984-7407
E-mail: rtk@doh.state.nj.us
Web address: http://www.nj.gov/health/eoh/rtkweb
The Right to Know Hazardous Substance Fact Sheets
are not intended to be copied and sold
for commercial purposes.

1-NITROPROPANE

Page 5 of 6

GLOSSARY
ACGIH is the American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists. They publish guidelines called Threshold Limit
Values (TLVs) for exposure to workplace chemicals.
Acute Exposure Guideline Levels (AEGLs) are established
by the EPA. They describe the risk to humans resulting from
once-in-a lifetime, or rare, exposure to airborne chemicals.
Boiling point is the temperature at which a substance can
change its physical state from a liquid to a gas.
A carcinogen is a substance that causes cancer.
The CAS number is unique, identifying number, assigned by
the Chemical Abstracts Service, to a specific chemical.
CFR is the Code of Federal Regulations, which are the
regulations of the United States government.
A combustible substance is a solid, liquid or gas that will burn.
A corrosive substance is a gas, liquid or solid that causes
destruction of human skin or severe corrosion of containers.
The critical temperature is the temperature above which a
gas cannot be liquefied, regardless of the pressure applied.
DEP is the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DOT is the Department of Transportation, the federal agency
that regulates the transportation of chemicals.
EPA is the Environmental Protection Agency, the federal
agency responsible for regulating environmental hazards.

LEL or Lower Explosive Limit, is the lowest concentration of
a combustible substance (gas or vapor) in the air capable of
continuing an explosion.
mg/m3 means milligrams of a chemical in a cubic meter of air.
It is a measure of concentration (weight/volume).
A mutagen is a substance that causes mutations. A mutation
is a change in the genetic material in a body cell. Mutations
can lead to birth defects, miscarriages, or cancer.
NFPA is the National Fire Protection Association. It classifies
substances according to their fire and explosion hazard.
NIOSH is the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health. It tests equipment, evaluates and approves
respirators, conducts studies of workplace hazards, and
proposes standards to OSHA.
NTP is the National Toxicology Program which tests chemicals
and reviews evidence for cancer.
OSHA is the federal Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, which adopts and enforces health and safety
standards.
PEOSHA is the New Jersey Public Employees Occupational
Safety and Health Act, which adopts and enforces health and
safety standards in public workplaces.
Permeated is the movement of chemicals through protective
materials.
ppm means parts of a substance per million parts of air. It is a
measure of concentration by volume in air.

ERG is the Emergency Response Guidebook. It is a guide for
emergency responders for transportation emergencies
involving hazardous substances.

Protective Action Criteria (PAC) are values established by
the Department of Energy and are based on AEGLs and
ERPGs. They are used for emergency planning of chemical
release events.

Emergency Response Planning Guideline (ERPG) values
provide estimates of concentration ranges where one
reasonably might anticipate observing adverse effects.

A reactive substance is a solid, liquid or gas that releases
energy under certain conditions.

A fetus is an unborn human or animal.
A flammable substance is a solid, liquid, vapor or gas that will
ignite easily and burn rapidly.
The flash point is the temperature at which a liquid or solid
gives off vapor that can form a flammable mixture with air.
IARC is the International Agency for Research on Cancer, a
scientific group.
Ionization Potential is the amount of energy needed to
remove an electron from an atom or molecule. It is measured
in electron volts.
IRIS is the Integrated Risk Information System database on
human health effects that may result from exposure to various
chemicals, maintained by federal EPA.

STEL is a Short Term Exposure Limit which is usually a 15minute exposure that should not be exceeded at any time
during a work day.
A teratogen is a substance that causes birth defects by
damaging the fetus.
UEL or Upper Explosive Limit is the highest concentration in
air above which there is too much fuel (gas or vapor) to begin a
reaction or explosion.
Vapor Density is the ratio of the weight of a given volume of
one gas to the weight of another (usually Air), at the same
temperature and pressure.
The vapor pressure is a force exerted by the vapor in
equilibrium with the solid or liquid phase of the same
substance. The higher the vapor pressure the higher
concentration of the substance in air.

Right to Know Hazardous Substance Fact Sheet
Common Name: 1-NITROPROPANE
Synonym: 1-NP
CAS No: 108-03-2
Molecular Formula: C3H7NO2
RTK Substance No: 1394
Description: Colorless liquid with a mild, fruity odor

HAZARD DATA
Hazard Rating

Firefighting

Reactivity

1 - Health

FLAMMABLE AND REACTIVE LIQUID
Use CO2, water spray or alcohol-resistant foam as
extinguishing agents.
POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE,
including Nitrogen Oxides.
CONTAINERS MAY EXPLODE IN FIRE.
Use water spray to keep fire-exposed containers cool.
Vapor is heavier than air and may travel a distance to
cause a fire or explosion far from the source.
Flow or agitation may generate electrostatic charges.
1-Nitropropane may form an ignitable vapor/air
mixture in closed tanks or containers.

1-Nitropropane reacts violently with OXIDIZING
AGENTS (such as PERCHLORATES, PEROXIDES,
PERMANGANATES, CHLORATES, NITRATES,
CHLORINE, BROMINE and FLUORINE) and
STRONG BASES (such as SODIUM HYDROXIDE,
POTASSIUM HYDROXIDE and CALCIUM
HYDROXIDE).
1-Nitropropane is not compatible with METAL
OXIDES; AMINES; STRONG ACIDS (such as
HYDROCHLORIC, SULFURIC and NITRIC); and
HYDROCARBONS.

3 - Fire
2 - Reactivity
DOT#: UN 2608
ERG Guide #: 129
Hazard Class: 3
(Flammable)

SPILL/LEAKS
Isolation Distance:
Spill: 50 meters (150 feet)
Fire: 800 meters (1/2 mile)
Absorb liquids in vermiculite, dry sand, earth, or a similar
material and place into sealed containers for disposal.
Keep 1-Nitropropane out of confined spaces, such as sewers,
because of the possibility of an explosion.
Use water spray to keep containers cool and to knock down
vapors.
Use only non-sparking tools and equipment, especially when
opening and closing containers of 1-Nitropropane.
DO NOT wash into sewer.

PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
Odor Threshold:
Flash Point:
LEL:
Auto Ignition Temp:
Vapor Density:
Vapor Pressure:
Specific Gravity:
Water Solubility:
Boiling Point:
Freezing Point:
Ionization Potential:
Molecular Weight:

EXPOSURE LIMITS
OSHA:
NIOSH:
ACGIH:
IDLH:

25 ppm, 8-hr TWA
25 ppm, 10-hr TWA
25 ppm, 8-hr TWA
1,000 ppm

The Protective Action Criteria values are:
PAC-1 = 25 ppm PAC-2 = 25 ppm PAC-3 = 1,000 ppm

HEALTH EFFECTS
Eyes:
Skin:
Inhalation:

Irritation
Irritation
Nose, throat and lung irritation with coughing,
wheezing and shortness of breath
Headache, fatigue and blue color to the skin
and lips (methemoglobinemia)
Dizziness, weakness, loss of coordination and
restlessness

11 ppm
o
o
o
o
75 to 97 F (24 to 36 C)
2.2%
o
o
o
o
789 to 802 F (421 to 428 C)
3.1 (air = 1)
o
o
13 mm Hg at 68 F (20 C)
1.003 (water = 1)
Very slightly soluble
o
o
269 F (132 C)
o
o
-162 F (-108 C)
10.81 eV
89.09

PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT
Gloves:

Butyl, Polyvinyl Alcohol, Silver Shield®/4H® and Barrier®
(>8-hr breakthrough)

Coveralls:

Tychem® Responder® and TK (>8-hr breakthrough)

Respirator:

SCBA

FIRST AID AND DECONTAMINATION
Remove the person from exposure.
Flush eyes with large amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. Remove
contact lenses if worn.
Remove contaminated clothing and wash contaminated skin with soap
and water.
Begin artificial respiration if breathing has stopped and CPR if necessary.
Transfer promptly to a medical facility.
August 2009

