Common Name: 1-OCTANETHIOL
CAS Number:
DOT Number:

111-88-6
UN 1228
UN 3071
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

RTK Substance number: 1435
Date: April 2002
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

HAZARD SUMMARY

WORKPLACE EXPOSURE LIMITS

* 1-Octanethiol can affect you when breathed in and may
be absorbed through the skin.
* Contact can irritate the skin and eyes.
* Breathing 1-Octanethiol can irritate the nose and throat.
* High exposure can cause headache, nausea and vomiting,
weakness and drowsiness.
* 1-Octanethiol may cause a skin allergy. If allergy
develops, very low future exposure can cause itching and a
skin rash.

NIOSH:

IDENTIFICATION
1-Octanethiol is a water-white liquid with a mild odor. It is
used in manufacturing as a polymerization conditioner.

REASON FOR CITATION
* 1-Octanethiol is on the Hazardous Substance List because
it is cited by DOT, NIOSH and NFPA.
* Definitions are provided on page 5.

HOW TO DETERMINE IF YOU ARE BEING
EXPOSED
The New Jersey Right to Know Act requires most employers
to label chemicals in the workplace and requires public
employers to provide their employees with information and
training concerning chemical hazards and controls. The
federal OSHA Hazard Communication Standard, 1910.1200,
requires private employers to provide similar training and
information to their employees.
* Exposure to hazardous substances should be routinely
evaluated. This may include collecting personal and area
air samples. You can obtain copies of sampling results
from your employer. You have a legal right to this
information under OSHA 1910.1020.
* If you think you are experiencing any work-related health
problems, see a doctor trained to recognize occupational
diseases. Take this Fact Sheet with you.

The recommended airborne exposure limit is
0.5 ppm, which should not be exceeded at any
time.

* The above exposure limit is for air levels only. When skin
contact also occurs, you may be overexposed, even though
air levels are less than the limits listed above.

WAYS OF REDUCING EXPOSURE
* Where possible, enclose operations and use local exhaust
ventilation at the site of chemical release. If local exhaust
ventilation or enclosure is not used, respirators should be
worn.
* Wear protective work clothing.
* Wash thoroughly immediately after exposure to
1-Octanethiol and at the end of the workshift.
* Post hazard and warning information in the work area. In
addition, as part of an ongoing education and training
effort, communicate all information on the health and
safety hazards of 1-Octanethiol to potentially exposed
workers.

1-OCTANETHIOL
This Fact Sheet is a summary source of information of all
potential and most severe health hazards that may result from
exposure. Duration of exposure, concentration of the substance
and other factors will affect your susceptibility to any of the
potential effects described below.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

HEALTH HAZARD INFORMATION
Acute Health Effects
The following acute (short-term) health effects may occur
immediately or shortly after exposure to 1-Octanethiol:
* Contact can irritate the skin and eyes.
* Breathing 1-Octanethiol can irritate the nose and throat.
* High exposure can cause headache, nausea and vomiting,
weakness and drowsiness.

Chronic Health Effects
The following chronic (long-term) health effects can occur at
some time after exposure to 1-Octanethiol and can last for
months or years:

Cancer Hazard
* According to the information presently available to the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services,
1-Octanethiol has not been tested for its ability to cause
cancer in animals.

Reproductive Hazard
* According to the information presently available to the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services,
1-Octanethiol has not been tested for its ability to affect
reproduction.

Other Long-Term Effects
* 1-Octanethiol may cause a skin allergy. If allergy
develops, very low future exposure can cause itching and a
skin rash.

MEDICAL
Medical Testing
If symptoms develop or overexposure is suspected, the
following is recommended:

page 2 of 6

WORKPLACE CONTROLS AND PRACTICES
Unless a less toxic chemical can be substituted for a hazardous
substance, ENGINEERING CONTROLS are the most
effective way of reducing exposure. The best protection is to
enclose operations and/or provide local exhaust ventilation at
the site of chemical release. Isolating operations can also
reduce exposure. Using respirators or protective equipment is
less effective than the controls mentioned above, but is
sometimes necessary.
In evaluating the controls present in your workplace, consider:
(1) how hazardous the substance is, (2) how much of the
substance is released into the workplace and (3) whether
harmful skin or eye contact could occur. Special controls
should be in place for highly toxic chemicals or when
significant skin, eye, or breathing exposures are possible.
In addition, the following control is recommended:
* Where possible, automatically pump liquid 1-Octanethiol
from drums or other storage containers to process
containers.
Good WORK PRACTICES can help to reduce hazardous
exposures. The following work practices are recommended:
* Workers whose clothing has been contaminated by
1-Octanethiol should change into clean clothing promptly.
* Contaminated work clothes should be laundered by
individuals who have been informed of the hazards of
exposure to 1-Octanethiol.
* Eye wash fountains should be provided in the immediate
work area for emergency use.
* If there is the possibility of skin exposure, emergency
shower facilities should be provided.
* On skin contact with 1-Octanethiol, immediately wash or
shower to remove the chemical. At the end of the
workshift, wash any areas of the body that may have
contacted
1-Octanethiol, whether or not known skin
contact has occurred.
* Do not eat, smoke, or drink where 1-Octanethiol is
handled, processed, or stored, since the chemical can be
swallowed. Wash hands carefully before eating, drinking,
applying cosmetics, smoking, or using the toilet.

PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT
* Evaluation by a qualified allergist, including careful
exposure history and special testing, may help diagnose
skin allergy.
Any evaluation should include a careful history of past and
present symptoms with an exam. Medical tests that look for
damage already done are not a substitute for controlling
exposure.
Request copies of your medical testing. You have a legal right
to this information under OSHA 1910.1020.

WORKPLACE CONTROLS ARE BETTER THAN
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT. However, for
some jobs (such as outside work, confined space entry, jobs
done only once in a while, or jobs done while workplace
controls are being installed), personal protective equipment
may be appropriate.
OSHA 1910.132 requires employers to determine the
appropriate personal protective equipment for each hazard and
to train employees on how and when to use protective
equipment.

page 3 of 6

1-OCTANETHIOL
The following recommendations are only guidelines and may
not apply to every situation.

Clothing
* Avoid skin contact with 1-Octanethiol. Wear protective
gloves and clothing. Safety equipment suppliers/
manufacturers can provide recommendations on the most
protective glove/clothing material for your operation.
* All protective clothing (suits, gloves, footwear, headgear)
should be clean, available each day, and put on before
work.

ACIDS (such as HYDROCHLORIC, SULFURIC and
NITRIC); STRONG BASES (such as SODIUM
HYDROXIDE
and
POTASSIUM
HYDROXIDE);
REDUCING AGENTS; and ALKALI METALS.
* Store in tightly closed containers in a cool, well-ventilated
area.
* Sources of ignition, such as smoking and open flames, are
prohibited where 1-Octanethiol is used, handled, or stored
in a manner that could create a potential fire or explosion
hazard.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Eye Protection
* Wear indirect-vent, impact and splash resistant goggles
when working with liquids.
* Wear a face shield along with goggles when working with
corrosive, highly irritating or toxic substances.

Q:

Respiratory Protection

Q:

IMPROPER USE OF RESPIRATORS IS DANGEROUS.
Such equipment should only be used if the employer has a
written program that takes into account workplace conditions,
requirements for worker training, respirator fit testing and
medical exams, as described in OSHA 1910.134.

A:

A:

Q:
* Where the potential exists for exposure over 0.5 ppm, use a
NIOSH approved full facepiece respirator with an organic
vapor cartridge. Increased protection is obtained from full
facepiece powered-air purifying respirators.
* If while wearing a filter or cartridge respirator you can
smell, taste, or otherwise detect 1-Octanethiol, or if while
wearing particulate filters abnormal resistance to breathing
is experienced, or eye irritation occurs while wearing a full
facepiece respirator, leave the area immediately. Check to
make sure the respirator-to-face seal is still good. If it is,
replace the filter or cartridge. If the seal is no longer good,
you may need a new respirator.
* Be sure to consider all potential exposures in your
workplace. You may need a combination of filters,
prefilters or cartridges to protect against different forms of a
chemical (such as vapor and mist) or against a mixture of
chemicals.
* Where the potential for high exposure exists, use a NIOSH
approved supplied-air respirator with a full facepiece
operated in a pressure-demand or other positive-pressure
mode. For increased protection use in combination with an
auxiliary self-contained breathing apparatus operated in a
pressure-demand or other positive-pressure mode.

HANDLING AND STORAGE
* Prior to working with 1-Octanethiol you should be trained
on its proper handling and storage.
* 1-Octanethiol is not compatible with OXIDIZING
AGENTS (such as PERCHLORATES, PEROXIDES,
PERMANGANATES,
CHLORATES,
NITRATES,
CHLORINE,
BROMINE
and
FLUORINE);
STRONG

A:

If I have acute health effects, will I later get chronic
health effects?
Not always. Most chronic (long-term) effects result from
repeated exposures to a chemical.
Can I get long-term effects without ever having shortterm effects?
Yes, because long-term effects can occur from repeated
exposures to a chemical at levels not high enough to make
you immediately sick.
What are my chances of getting sick when I have been
exposed to chemicals?
The likelihood of becoming sick from chemicals is
increased as the amount of exposure increases. This is
determined by the length of time and the amount of
material to which someone is exposed.

Q:
A:

When are higher exposures more likely?
Conditions which increase risk of exposure include
physical and mechanical processes (heating, pouring,
spraying, spills and evaporation from large surface areas
such as open containers), and "confined space" exposures
(working inside vats, reactors, boilers, small rooms, etc.).

Q:

Is the risk of getting sick higher for workers than for
community residents?
Yes. Exposures in the community, except possibly in
cases of fires or spills, are usually much lower than those
found in the workplace.
However, people in the
community may be exposed to contaminated water as
well as to chemicals in the air over long periods. This
may be a problem for children or people who are already
ill.

A:

page 4 of 6

1-OCTANETHIOL

-----------------------------------------------------------------------The following information is available from:
New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services
Occupational Health Service
PO Box 360
Trenton, NJ 08625-0360
(609) 984-1863
(609) 984-7407 (fax)
Web address:

http://www.state.nj.us/health/eoh/odisweb/

Industrial Hygiene Information
Industrial hygienists are available to answer your questions
regarding the control of chemical exposures using exhaust
ventilation, special work practices, good housekeeping, good
hygiene practices, and personal protective equipment including
respirators. In addition, they can help to interpret the results of
industrial hygiene survey data.
Medical Evaluation
If you think you are becoming sick because of exposure to
chemicals at your workplace, you may call personnel at the
Department of Health and Senior Services, Occupational
Health Service, who can help you find the information you
need.
Public Presentations
Presentations and educational programs on occupational health
or the Right to Know Act can be organized for labor unions,
trade associations and other groups.
Right to Know Information Resources
The Right to Know Infoline (609) 984-2202 can answer
questions about the identity and potential health effects of
chemicals, list of educational materials in occupational health,
references used to prepare the Fact Sheets, preparation of the
Right to Know Survey, education and training programs,
labeling requirements, and general information regarding the
Right to Know Act. Violations of the law should be reported to
(609) 984-2202.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

1-OCTANETHIOL

page 5 of 6

DEFINITIONS
ACGIH is the American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists. It recommends upper limits (called
TLVs) for exposure to workplace chemicals.
A carcinogen is a substance that causes cancer.
The CAS number is assigned by the Chemical Abstracts
Service to identify a specific chemical.
A combustible substance is a solid, liquid or gas that will burn.
A corrosive substance is a gas, liquid or solid that causes
irreversible damage to human tissue or containers.
DEP is the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.

NAERG is the North American Emergency Response
Guidebook. It was jointly developed by Transport Canada, the
United States Department of Transportation and the Secretariat
of Communications and Transportation of Mexico. It is a
guide for first responders to quickly identify the specific or
generic hazards of material involved in a transportation
incident, and to protect themselves and the general public
during the initial response phase of the incident.
NCI is the National Cancer Institute, a federal agency that
determines the cancer-causing potential of chemicals.
NFPA is the National Fire Protection Association. It classifies
substances according to their fire and explosion hazard.

DOT is the Department of Transportation, the federal agency
that regulates the transportation of chemicals.

NIOSH is the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health. It tests equipment, evaluates and approves respirators,
conducts studies of workplace hazards, and proposes standards
to OSHA.

EPA is the Environmental Protection Agency, the federal
agency responsible for regulating environmental hazards.

NTP is the National Toxicology Program which tests
chemicals and reviews evidence for cancer.

A fetus is an unborn human or animal.

OSHA is the Occupational Safety and Health Administration,
which adopts and enforces health and safety standards.

A flammable substance is a solid, liquid, vapor or gas that will
ignite easily and burn rapidly.
The flash point is the temperature at which a liquid or solid
gives off vapor that can form a flammable mixture with air.
HHAG is the Human Health Assessment Group of the federal
EPA.

PEL is the Permissible Exposure Limit which is enforceable by
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
PIH is a DOT designation for chemicals which are Poison
Inhalation Hazards.
ppm means parts of a substance per million parts of air. It is a
measure of concentration by volume in air.

IARC is the International Agency for Research on Cancer, a
scientific group that classifies chemicals according to their
cancer-causing potential.

A reactive substance is a solid, liquid or gas that releases
energy under certain conditions.

A miscible substance is a liquid or gas that will evenly dissolve
in another.

A teratogen is a substance that causes birth defects by
damaging the fetus.

mg/m3 means milligrams of a chemical in a cubic meter of air.
It is a measure of concentration (weight/volume).

TLV is the Threshold Limit Value, the workplace exposure
limit recommended by ACGIH.

A mutagen is a substance that causes mutations. A mutation is
a change in the genetic material in a body cell. Mutations can
lead to birth defects, miscarriages, or cancer.

The vapor pressure is a measure of how readily a liquid or a
solid mixes with air at its surface. A higher vapor pressure
indicates a higher concentration of the substance in air and
therefore increases the likelihood of breathing it in.

page 6 of 6

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> E M E R G E N C Y I N F O R M A T I O N <<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<
============================================
FOR LARGE SPILLS AND FIRES immediately call your fire
department. You can request emergency information from the
following:

Common Name: 1-OCTANETHIOL
DOT Number: UN 1228
UN 3071
NAERG Code: 131
CAS Number: 111-88-6

Hazard rating
FLAMMABILITY
REACTIVITY

NJDHSS

NFPA

-

2

-

0

COMBUSTIBLE
POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE
CONTAINERS MAY EXPLODE IN FIRE
Hazard Rating Key: 0=minimal; 1=slight; 2=moderate;
3=serious; 4=severe

FIRE HAZARDS
* 1-Octanethiol is a COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID.
* Use dry chemical, CO2, alcohol or polymer foam
extinguishers, as water may not be effective in fighting
fires.
* POISONOUS GASES ARE PRODUCED IN FIRE,
including Sulfur Oxides and Hydrogen Sulfide.
* CONTAINERS MAY EXPLODE IN FIRE.
* Use water spray to keep fire-exposed containers cool.
* Vapors may travel to a source of ignition and flash back.
* Vapor is heavier than air and may travel a distance to cause
a fire or explosion far from the source.
* If employees are expected to fight fires, they must be
trained and equipped as stated in OSHA 1910.156.

SPILLS AND EMERGENCIES
If 1-Octanethiol is spilled or leaked, take the following steps:

CHEMTREC: (800) 424-9300
NJDEP HOTLINE: 1-877-WARN-DEP
============================================

HANDLING AND STORAGE (See page 3)
FIRST AID
For POISON INFORMATION call 1-800-222-1222

Eye Contact
* Immediately flush with large amounts of water for at least
15 minutes, occasionally lifting upper and lower lids.

Skin Contact
* Quickly remove contaminated clothing. Immediately wash
contaminated skin with large amounts of soap and water.

Breathing
* Remove the person from exposure.
* Transfer promptly to a medical facility.

PHYSICAL DATA
Vapor Pressure: 0.4245 mm Hg at 77oF (25oC)
Flash Point: 115oF (46oC)
Water Solubility: Insoluble
OTHER COMMONLY USED NAMES
Chemical Name:
1-Octanethiol

* Evacuate persons not wearing protective equipment from
area of spill or leak until clean-up is complete.
* Remove all ignition sources.
* Cover with an activated charcoal adsorbent and place in
covered containers for disposal.
* Ventilate and wash area after clean-up is complete.
* Keep 1-Octanethiol out of a confined space, such as a
sewer, because of the possibility of an explosion, unless the
sewer is designed to prevent the build-up of explosive
concentrations.
* It may be necessary to contain and dispose of
1-Octanethiol as a HAZARDOUS WASTE. Contact your
state Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or
your regional office of the federal Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) for specific recommendations.
* If employees are required to clean-up spills, they must be
properly trained and equipped. OSHA 1910.120(q) may be
applicable.

Other Names:
1-Mercaptooctane; n-Octyl Mercaptan
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Not intended to be copied and sold for commercial
purposes.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND
SENIOR SERVICES
Right to Know Program
PO Box 368, Trenton, NJ 08625-0368
(609) 984-2202
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

